^Oresfiiteb  to 

(S,ht  IHibraru 

of  tljc 

Pxtiuersitg  of  Qloronto 


R.S.  McNaughton,  Esq. 


VIRGIL'S  AENEID: 


EXPLAI^rATORT     ISTOTES. 


BT 


IIENRY  S.  FHIEZE, 


PROFESSOR   OF   LATIX   IN'   THE   STATE    UNIVEKSITY   OP   MICHIGAh, 


NEW  YOEK : 
D.   APPLETON   AND   COMPANY, 

443   &   445   BROADWAY. 
LONDON:    16    LITTLE    BBITAIN. 

1SG6. 


Enteked,  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  tlie  year  1S60,  \>y 
D.  APPLETON  &  CO., 
In  tho  CIcrk'3  Offieo  of  tbo  District  Court  of  tlie  United  States  for  tho  Southcrn 
District  of  Nwv  York. 


to 

THE    REV.    HEXRY   P.    TAPPAN,    D.D.,LL.D., 

CORRESPOXDING    MEMBER 

OF     TnE     INSTITUTE     OF     FRANCE, 

CHANCELLOR     OF    THE     STATE     UNIYERSITY    OF    MICUIGAM 

TUIS    EDITION    OF   TUE    AEXEID 

IS 

MOST     KESPECTFTTLLT    DEDICATEI). 


PREFACE. 

It  has  been  thoiiglit  desirable  to  adopt  for  the  present 
edition  of  the  Aeneid  a  standard  text,  and  to  adhere  to  it 
thronghout,  without  any  variation,  even  in  those  few  pas- 
sages  where  the  editor  might  prefer  a  change  of  readiiag. 
Accordingly  the  rcvised  text  of  Jahn,  as  one  of  the  most 
faultless  and  reliable,  and  as  tlie  one  at  present,  perhaps, 
most  generally  approved,  has  been  carefully  reprinted 
from  the  German  edition,  as  the  basis  of  the  school  com- 
mentary  here  offered  to  the  American  student. 

Tlie  notes  have  been  derived  from  most  of  the  ablest 
commentators  on  the  Aeneid,  and  more  especially  from 
He}me,  Wagner,  Thiel,  and  Forbiger.  The  editor  has 
also  frequently  consulted  the  numerous  school  and  col 
lege  editions,  and  is  particularly  indebted  to  the  admira- 
ble  commentaries  of  Theodore  Ladewig  and  A.  H.  Bryce, 
recently  published,  the  former  in  Berlin,  and  the  Latter  in 
London  and  Glasgow. 

To  meet  the  wants  of  American  students,  very  fre- 
quent  references  are  made  in  the  notes,  especially  in  the 
earlier  part  of  the  work,  to  the  revised  edition  of  Andrews 
and  Stoddard's  Latin  Grammar,  and  to  Dr.  Anthon's  edi- 
tion  of  Zumpfs  Latin  Grammar.      References  are  also 


VI  PREFACE. 


occasionally  made  to  Madvig,  Eamshorn,  and  otlier 
grammatical  worlcs.  Tliese  references_to  tlie  grammars, 
and  also  tliose  to  parallel  passages  in  Yirgil,  if  carefully 
used,  cannot  fail  to  i^romote  a  critical  scliolarsliip. 

Tlie  illnstrative  cuts  wliicli  accompanj  the  notes  havo 
been  taken  mostly  from  yolhner^s  Dictionarj  of  Mythol- 
ogy,  and  from  Hope's  Costumes  of  the  Ancients.  They 
have  been  selected  for  the  purpose  of  illustrating  ancient 
usages,  arts,  costumes,  utensils,  and  implements  of  war, 
and  also  as  a  means  of  imparting  to  the  reader  some  ade- 
quate  idea  of  the  classic  gods  and  heroes  as  they  existed 
in  the  minds  of  Virgil  and  tlie  poets  of  his  day.  Yirgil 
and  his  contemporaries,  when  speaking  of  the  deities  of 
mytholog}',  undoubtedly  had  in  view  just  such  forms  as 
have  come  down  to  us  in  the  numberless  statues,  bas- 
reliefs,  wall-paintings,  vase-paintings,  and  intaglios,  which 
fill  up  the  museums  of  Europe.  Some  of  the  most  re- 
markable  of  these  are  represented  in  this  work.  A  list 
of  the  wood-cuts,  followed  by  an  alphabetical  index  of 
the  things  illustrated,  will  be  found  below. 

The  editor  takes  this  opportunity  of  returning  his 
sincere  thanks  for  many  valuable  suggestions  received 
from  classical  teachers,  and  especially  to  Mr.  C.  B. 
Grant,  of  the  Ann  Arbor  High  School,  for  efficient  aid 
in  the  revision  of  the  proofs. 

State  Unitersity  of  Michigan,  May^  1860. 


/<?>, 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIOITS. 

FAaR 

1 .  Virgil — fiom  a  bust  in  the  Capitoline  Museum  at  Kome.  2 

BOOK  I. 

2.  The  three  Fates — from  Flaxman, .....  307 

3.  Juno — from  a  statue  in  the  Vatican  at  Eome,           .           .  314 

4.  Eurus — from  the  Tower  of  the  Winds  at  Athens,           .           .           .  317 

5.  Family  cf  Tritons — from  an  antique  cutting  on  amethyst,   .           ,  320 

6.  Neptune  iu  his  chariot  calraing  the  sea — Flaxman,        .           .            .  321 

7.  Roman  Orator  of  the  early  republican  period — from  an  anciont  rase- 

painting, .            .            .            .           .            .           .            .           .  331 

S.  The  Huntress  Diana — from  a  statue  in  the  Vatican, .            .           .  335 

9.  Venus  Genetrix — from  a  statue  in  the  Louvre  at  Paris,             .           .  340 

10.  Amazon — from  a  Greek  Statue  in  the  Vatican,          .           .            .  347 

11.  Bacchanal  reclining  at  a  feast — from  a  vase-painting,       .        .           .  360 

12.  Hector's  body  at  thc  car  of  Achilles — from  Flaxman,           .            .  364 

BOOK  II. 

13.  Minerva— from  Hope's  Costumes,             .....  366 

14.  Diomed  seizing  the  Palladium— from  an  antique  gem,         .            .  374 

15.  Laocoon  and  his  sons  in  the  toils  of  the  serpents — from  the  cclebrated 

statue  in  the  Vatican,           .....  378 

16.  Eector  in  battle — from  an  antique  gem,  .            .           .            .           :  382 

17.  Aeneas  hastening  to  battle— from  an  ancient  vase-painting,            .  385 

18.  An  attack  upon  a  fortified  palace — from  Layard's  Nineveh,     .           .  890 

19.  Attack  upon  a  citadel — from  Layard's  Nineveh,        .           ,           .  391 

20.  Head  of  Priam — from  a  bas-relief  in  the  Vatican,           .           .           .  395 

21.  Jlenelaus,  on  the  point  of  taking  vengeance  on  Helen,  disarmed  by  her 

beauty, — from  a  vase-painting,             .....  397 

22   PlainofTroy — landscape  view,          .           .           .           .           ..  405 

BOOK  IIL 
S3.  Ancient  ships  under  sails  and  oars— from  a  vrall-paintlng  in  the  Bour- 

bon  Museum  at  Naples,        .,...,  406* 

24.  Harpy — from  a  vase-painting,       ......  416 

25.  Scylla— from  Flaxman,            ...,.,  425 


vm  LIST    OF   ILLUSTRATIONS. 


BOOK  IV. 


PAGE 


2G.  Melpomcnc,  the  muse  of  tragedy — from  a  wall-painting  iu  Hcrcula- 

neum,             ........  437 

21^  Cupid  torturing  Psyche  or  the  soul — from  an  antique  gem,      .  440 

28.  Apollo — from  the  celebrated  statue  in  the  Belvedere  of  the  Vatican,  442 

29.  Jupiter  Ammon — from  an  ancient  coin,   .....  444 

30.  Trojan  or  Phrjgian  youth — from  a  vase-painting,  .  .  .  445 
81.  Mercury  conveying  a  message  from  Olympus — froni  a  vase-painting,  447 

52.  Dido's  death — from  an  ancient  wall-painting,     ....  462 

53.  Site  of  Carthage — landscape  view,      .....  463 

BOOK  V. 

34.  Helios,  or  Sol  in  his  chariot,  attended  by  Lucifer,  Castor,  and  the  per- 

sonification  of  sea  and  sky — from  an  ancient  vase-painting,        .  404 

35.  Melicertes,  or  Portunus — from  a  statue  in  the  Vatican, .            .           .  474 

36.  Ganymede  and  the  eagle — from  a  statue  by  Leochares,       .            .  475 

37.  Phrygian  Amazon — from  a  vase-painting,          ....  482 

38.  Jupiter  Pluvius — from  Vollmer,          .            .            .            .            .  491 

39.  Group  of  Nereids  and  Tritons — from  a  bas-relief  on  a  sarcophagus,    .  496 

40.  The  Sirens— from  Flaxmau,     ......  493 

BOOK  VI. 

41.  Cumae  and  its  environs— landscape  view,     ....  500 

42.  Hecate,  or  Trivia — from  VoUmer, ......  501 

43.  Charon  landing  ghosts  from  his  boat— from  an  ancient  bas-relief, .  516 

44.  Jupiter  destroying  the  giants — from  a  cameo  in  the  Bourbon  Museum,  523 

45.  Tantalus,  Ixion,  and  Sisyphus— from  an  ancient  bas-relief,             .  524 

46.  Cybele,  Corybantes,  and  the  infant  Jupiter— from  a  bas-relief  in  the 

Capitol  at  Rome,       .......  53a 

47.  Pluto  and  Proserpine  in  Hadcs— from  an  ancient  bas-relief,     .            .  53S 

BOOK  vn. 

48.  Chart  of  the  Trojan  camp  and  its  environs  on  the  Tiber— from  Wag- 

ner's  Heyne, ....,...'  539 

49.  Erato — from  a  Herculanean  wall-painting,         ....  540 

50.  Janus — from  a  Roman  coin,     ......  542 

51.  Temple  of  Janus — from  a  coin  of  Nero,   .....  547 

52.  Praeneste  (Palestrina) — landscape  view,.      ....  549 

53.  Soractc  (S.  Silvestro)— landscape  vicw,  .....  549 

54.  Teanum  (Teano)— laudscape  view,     ...                      .  551 

BOOK  VIIL 

65.  Saturn— from  an  antique  gcm  in  the  Bourbou  Jluscum,            .           ,  552 

66.  Goblet,  or  cantharus— from  tho  Bourbon  Museum,  .  .  .  555 
57.  Minerva  with  the  Aegis— from  a  vase-paiuting, .  .  •  .  657 
68.  Vulcan  at  his  forge— from  an  antique  gem,   ....  5tf 


LIST   OF   ILLUSTEATIONS. 


IX 


59.  Komulus  and  Remus  nursed  by  the  wolf— from  an  ancient  bronze 

statue  ia  tlie  Capitoline  Conservatory,        ....  559 

60.  Anubis — from  Vollmer,      .......  5G0 

61.  The  Nile  as  a  river  god — from  a  Roman  coin,  .  .  .  560 

BOOK  IX. 

62.  Head  of  Juno — from  the  bust  in  the  Villa  Ludovisi  at  Rome,   .  .  561 

63.  Calliope — from  VoUmer,  .  .  .  . '         .  .  565 

64.  Head  of  Medusa — from  a  cutting  on  agate  in  the  Bourbon  Museum,    .  563 


BOOK  X. 

65.  Jupiter  and  the  Olympian  gods — bas-relief  on  a  Grecian  altar, 

66.  Etruscan  warriors — from  Hope's  Costumes,  . 

67.  Nemesis,      ........ 

BOOK  XI. 

68.  Roman  trophy — from  a  Pompeian  bas-relief,      .  .  . 

69.  Amazon  in  battle — from  a  vase-painting.       .  .  , 


569 
571 
576 


577 

5S4 


BOOK  XIL 


7C,  Victorious  warrior, 


503 


MiBcellaneous  objects, 


695,  596,  597,  593 


4),. 


ALPIIABETICAL  LIST 

OF   THINGS     ILLUSTRATED     IN     THE     CUT9, 

[The  numbers  refer  to  the  pages  in  thc  notes.] 


Aegis,  557. 

Amphorae,  cadi,  or  wine  jars,  595. 

Ancile,  or  sacred  shield,  596. 

Antennae,  406. 

Apex,  and  priesfs  cap,  59S. 

Aplustre,  406,  516. 

Ara,  397. 

Arcus,  4S2. 

Aries,  or  battering  ram,  390. 

Arma,  577. 

Balteus,  442,  4S2. 
Beak  of  ship,  598. 
Bigae,  593. 
Bipennis,  584. 
BuUa,  or  stud,  593. 

Caduceus,  447,  538. 
Cadus,  595. 
Caestus,  595,  598. 
Carchesium,  595. 
.  Chlamys,  442,  447. 
Clipeus,  3S2,  397. 
Conus,  385. 

Corona,  314,  437,  561,  565,  593. 
Cortina  and  tripod,  597. 
Cothurnus,  336. 
Crista,  385,  593. 

Culter,  ensis,  or  sacrificial  knife,  596. 
Currus,  464,  523,  593. 

Embroidery  on  garments,  &c.,  360,  584. 
Ensis,  397 ;  ensis  for  sacrifice,  598. 


Falx,  552. 

Fasces  and  securis,  596. 

Fibula,  442. 

Focus,  597. 

Fulmen,  523,  569. 

Funeral-pile,  462. 

Galea,  366,  3S2,  397. 
Gladius,  397,  571. 
Gubernaculum,  320,  516. 

Hasta,  SS2,  3S5,  593. 
Helmet,  see  Galea. 

Incus,  557. 
Infula,  596. 

Lacunar,  or  laquear,  462. 
Limbus,  366,  5S4. 
Lorica,  or  thorax,  445,  571,  593. 
Lyra,  540. 

Mitra,  395,  445,  4S2. 

Navis,  406. 

Ocreae,  385. 

Palla,  314,  437,  540. 
Palladium,  374. 
Patera,  314,  596. 
Pelta  {lunata),  347. 
Peplum,  S40. 
Persona,  or  mask,  437. 
Petasus,  538. 


Xll 


LIST    OF    THINGS    ILLUSTRATED. 


Phalerae,  593. 
Pharetra,  347,  482. 
Poculum,  360,  516,  555,  595. 
Prora,  406,  595. 

Quadrigae,  464,  523. 

Bedimiculum,  482. 
Remus,  516,  406. 
Eogus,  462. 
Rostrum,  598. 

Sagitta,  482. 
Scala,  S90. 

Sceptrum,  314,  538,  569. 
Scyphus,  360. 
Securis,  584,  596. 
Sertum,  547. 
Solium,  533,  569. 


Talaria,  447. 

Thorax,  or  lorica,  445,  571,  593. 

Thunderbolt,  523,  569. 

Thyrsus,  360. 

Tibiae,  416. 

Taenia,  437,  565,  596. 

Toga,  331. 

Torus,  360. 

Trident,  321. 

Tripod,  597. 

Tropaeum,  577.  . 

Tympanum,  596. 

Velum,  the  sail  of  a  ship,  406. 
Velum  or  velamen,  a  vail,  397,  588,  552, 
Vittae,  437,  596. 
Volumen,  331,  565. 


<^ 


LIFE  Am  WMTmGS  OF  VIRGIL. 

PcTBLius  ViSGiLiiJS*  IVLvEO  "svas  born  at  Andes,  a  villago 
near  Mantua,  in  the  consulsliip  of  Ponipey  and  Crassus,  b.  c. 
VO.  Yirgil's  father  possessed  a  farm  at  Andes  sufiiciently 
valuable  to  place  his  family  in  easy  circumstances,  and  to  af- 
ford  him  the  means  of  educathig  his  son  under  the  most  emi- 
nent  teachers  then  living  iu  Italy.  The  education  of  Virgil 
appears  to  have  been  commenced  at  Cremona,  from  -whence, 
on  assuming  the  manly  gown,  m  his  sixteenth  year,  he  was 
transferred  to  the  charge  of  new  teachers  at  Milan. 

After  pursuing  his  studies,  probably  for  several  years,  at 
Milan,  he  placed  himself  under  the  instruction  of  the  Greek 
poet  and  grammarian,  Parthenius,  -who  was  then  flourishing 
at  Naples.  At  the  age  of  twenty-three  he  left  Naples  for 
Rome,  where  he  finished  his  education  under  Syro  the  Epicu- 
rean,  an  accompUshed  teacher  of  philosophy,  mathematics,  and 
physics. 

Virgil's  love  of  literary  pursuits,  as  well  as  the  delicacy 
of  his  physical  constitution,  led  him  to  choose  a  life  of  retire- 
ment  rather  than  that  public  career  which  was  more  generally 
deemed  proper  for  a  Roman  citizen,  Hence,  at  the  age  when 
aspu'ing  young  Eomans  usually  entered  upon  the  stirring 
Bcenes  of  poHtical  and  military  life,  he  withdrew  from  Rome 
to  his  native  Andes,  with  the  intention  of  devoting  himself  to 

*  The  name,  as  givcn  in  tlie  oldcr  manuscripts  and  inscriptions,  ia  Vei> 
gilius. 


Xiv  LIFE   AND   WRITINGS   OF    VIRGIL. 

agriculture,  science,  and  letters.  The  Sicilian  Greek,  Theocri- 
tus,  was  at  this  time  his  favorite  author,  and  it  was  from  him 
that  the  general  plan,  though  not  the  individual  character,  of 
the  BucoHcs  was  derived. 

The  minor  poems,  such  as  the  Ciilex,  Ciris,  &c.,  which 
have  been  appended  to  the  works  of  Virgil,  aud  which  are 
Bometimes  reckoned  araong  his  earher  productions,  are  as- 
cribed  to  him  on  very  insuflScient  grounds.  The  Eclogues 
Avere  commeuced  about  b.  c.  42,  at  the  request  of  C.  Asinius 
Polho,  who  was  then  acting  as  the  Heutenant  of  Antony  in 
GauL  PolHo  was  himself  distinguished  as  a  poet,  and  not  less- 
as  a  scholar,  orator,  and  historiau.  IJnder  his  patronage  the 
Eclogues  numbered  in  tlie  present  arrangement  2,  3,  and  5, 
had  already  been  written,  when  the  Hterary  labors  and  the 
peaceM  life  of  the  poet  were  suddenly  interrupted.  The 
veteran  legions  of  Octavian,  on  returning  from  PhiHppi,  and 
demandmg  the  aUotments  of  land  which  had  been  promised 
them  as  a  reward  for  their  services  in  the  civil  war,  were 
authorized  to  take  possession  of  eighteen  ItaHan  cities,  with 
the  district  of  country  pertaining  to  each.  The  cities  thus 
Ireated  were  those  which  had  espoused  the  slde  of  Brutus ; 
for  this  the  unhappy  occupants  of  the  adjacent  country  were 
forced  to  give  up  their  hereditary  estates  to  the  rapacious 
soldiery.  As  the  lands  of  Cremona,  which  was  one  of  the 
condemned  cities,  were  not  sufficient  to  satisfy  the  legion- 
aries  to  whom  they  had  been  assigned,  they  took  violent 
possession  also  of  a  part  of  the  country  belonging  to  the 
neigliboring  city  of  Mantua.  Virgil,  whose  farm  was  in  this 
district,  and  was  thus  endangered,  had  recourse  at  first  to 
PoUio,  and  for  a  time  Avas  secure  imder  Iiis  protection.  But 
when  that  commander,  in  b.  c.  41,  raarched  with  his  trooj)s 
to  thc  aid  of  L.  Antonius  in  the  Perusian  war,  VirgU  w\as 
compelled  to  seek  relief  from  Octavian  m  person,  and  for  thia 
purpose  visited  Rome.  It  was  the  kind  reception  given  liim 
by  the  emperor  on  this  occasion  which  inspired  the  grateful 
and  glowing  eulogy  containcd  in  thc  first  Ecloguc. 

After  tho  close  of  the  Pcrusian  war  thc  Mantuan  couutry 


LIFE   AND   WKITINGS   OF   YIEGIL.  XV 

was  again  disturbed  by  the  demands  of  the  veterans,  and  our 
poet  in  vain,  tbougli  at  tbc  risk  of  bis  life,  attempted  to  main- 
tain  bis  rigbts  against  tbo  centurion  Arrius,  Flceing  again 
for  succor  to  Octavian,  be  was  reinstated,  tbougb  not  witbout 
long  and  anxious  delay,  in  tbe  possession  of  bis  farm.  During 
tbis  period  of  delay  and  depressing  uncertainty,  be  wrote  tbe 
uintb  Eclogue,  in  wbicb  be  bewails  bis  unbappy  lot.  But  on 
obtaining  at  lengtb  tbe  object  of  bis  petition,  bis  joy  and  grati- 
tude  found  utterance  in  tbe  beautiful  bymn  called  tbe  fourtb 
Eclogue,  in  wbicb  be  bails  tbe  auspicious  times  just  dawning 
on  tbe  world,  and  initiated  by  tbe  consulsbip  of  bis  friend  and 
patron  PoIIio.  Tbe  sixtb  Eclogue  was  composed  in  tbe  fol- 
lovang  year,  b.  c.  39,  in  fulfilment  of  a  promise  made  to 
Varus.  The  eigbth  was  written  in  tbe  autumn  of  tbe  same 
year  in  honor  of  Pollio,  wbo  bad  gained  a  brilliant  victoiy 
over  tbe  Partbini,  a  peoi^Ie  of  Dalmatia.  The  two  remaining 
Eclogues,  the  seventb  and  tentb,  were  probably  composed  in 
the  two  following  years. 

The  Eclogues  establisbed  tbe  reputation  of  tbe  poet,  and 
gained  bira  at  once  ardent  friends  and  admirers  among  tbe 
most  powerful  and  the  most  cultivated  of  the  Romans. 
Among  tbese,  besides  bis  early  and  fast  friend,  PoIIio,  were 
Octavian,  Maecenas,  Yarius,  Horace,  and  Propertius.  These 
and  all  otber  educated  Romans  of  tbe  day  regarded  Virgil  as 
already  superior  in  many  respects  to  any  poet  wbo  bad  yet 
appeared.  It  was  most  of  all  in  tbe  exquisite  finisb  and  har- 
mony  of  bis  hexaraeters  that  be  excelled  aU  wbo  bad  precedcd 
bim.  The  hexameter  verse  bad  been  first  introduced  into  tbe 
Latm  language,  at  the  close  of  tbe  second  Punic  war,  by  tbe 
soldier  and  poet  Ennius.  But  though  distinguished  by  origi- 
nality,  strengtb,  and  vigor,  tbe  poetry  of  Ennius  was  harsb 
and  rugged  to  a  degree  wbicb  rendered  it  to  tbe  more  culti- 
vated  tastes  of  later  generations  almost  intolerable.  Nor  by 
the  poets  who  succeeded  Ennius  bad  any  sucb  improvement 
been  made  in  the  composition  of  Latui  verse,  as  to  admit  of 
any  comparison  between  tbera  and  tben*  Grecian  models.  It 
n\as  reseiwed  for  two  great  poets  of  Rome,  iwo  congenial  spirits, 


XVI  LIFE   AND    WRITINGS   OF    VIRGIL. 

filled  with  the  niost  lively  admiration  of  eacli  other,  laboring 
side  by  side,  both  striving  earnestly  for  the  same  object, — it 
was  reserved  for  Virgil  and  Horace  to  elevate  the  national 
poetry  to  a  character  worthy  of  R.ome,  to  develop  all  the  re- 
sources  of  their  noble  language,  and  to  make  it  flow  both  in 
heroic  and  lyric  verse  with  all  the  grace  and  dignity  which 
had  liitherto  been  characteristic  of  the  Greek  alone. 

After  the  publication  of  the  Eclogues,  VirgU  appears  to 
have  j^assed  the  remainder  of  his  life  chiefly  at  Naples.  His 
feeble  health  was  probably  the  occasion  of  this. 

It  was  here  that  he  composed  the  Georgics,  a  didactic 
poem  in  four  books,  in  which  he  endeavors  to  recall  the  Ital- 
ians  to  their  primitive,  but  loug  neglectcd  pursuit  of  agricul- 
ture.  In  point  of  versification  this  is  the  most  finished  of  the 
works  of  our  poet,  and,  indeed,  as  Addison  remarks,  it  may 
be  regarded  as  in  this  respect  the  most  perfect  of  all  poems. 
In  the  first  book  he  treats  of  the  management  of  fields,  in  the 
sccond  of  trces,  in  the  third  of  horses  and  cattle,  and  in  the 
fourth  of  bees.  He  has  gathered  into  this  poem  all  the  expc- 
rience  of  tlie  ancient  Italians  on  these  subjects,  and  he  has 
contrived  to  make  them  attractive  by  associating  them  with 
wonderful  beauty  of  diction  and  imagery,  and  with  charming 
variety  of  illustration. 

Having  devoted  seven  years,  from  b.  c.  37  to  b.  c.  30,  to 
the  writing  of  this  work,  and  couscious  that  his  poetic  labors 
must  be  ended  by  an  early  death,  he  now  entered  upon  tho 
long  cherished  plau  of  composiug  an  Epic  in  the  Homeric 
style,  which  should  at  once  commemorate  the  glory  of  Rome 
and  of  Octavian,  and  win  back  the  Romans,  if  possible,  to  the 
religious  virtues  of  their  progenitors.  He  chose  for  his  theme 
the  fortunes  of  Aeneas,  the  fabled  founder  of  the  JuHan  fami- 
ly ;  and,  hence,  called  his  epic  the  Aeneid,  which  he  divided 
into  twelve  books.  Ile  had  already  been  employed  eleven 
years  upon  this  great  work,  and  had  not  yet  put  to  it  the  fin- 
ishing  hand,  wlicn  he  was  overtaken  by  his  last  sickness. 
Having  made  a  voyagc  to  Greece,  with  the  intentiou  of  visit- 
ing  Attica  and  Asia,  on  arriving  at  Athens  ho  met  Octavian, 


LIFE    AND    WRITINGS    OF    VIRGIL.  Xvii 

who  liappened  to  be  at  tbat  time  returning  froni  Asia  JMinof 
to  Italy.  Virgil  was  easily  persuaded  by  liis  friend  and  patron 
to  return  -with  him  immediately  to  Rome,  wMch,  however,  he 
was  not  destined  again  to  see.  His  malady  had  continually 
increased  during  the  voyage,  and  a  few  days  after  landing  at 
Brundusium  he  exj)ired.  His  death  occurred  in  b,  c.  19.  His 
remains  were  conveyed  from  Brundusium  to  Naples,  and 
buried  on  the  hill  of  Posilippo,  in  the  tomb  still  preserved  and 
revered  as  the  "  tomb  of  Virgil." 

It  is  said  that  Virgil,  a  short  time  before  his  death,  desired 
to  burn  np  his  Aeneid,  in  consequence  of  the  unperfect  state 
in  which  it  would  necessarily  be  left.  But  being  dissuaded 
from  this  pnrpose  by  his  friends,  Tucca  and  Varius,  he  direct- 
ed  them  in  his  will  to  strike  out  all  the  verses  which  were  in- 
complete,  but  to  add  nothing.  It  does  not  appear,  however, 
that  any  thing  was  erased  by  them,  nnless  Ave  admit  the  ac- 
count  of  some  of  the  grammarians,  who  alleged  that  Tucca  and 
Varius  rejected  thc  four  verses,  Ille  ego^  etc,  commonly 
placed  at  the  bcginning,  and  tho  passage  567-588  in  the  sec- 
ond  book. 

The  Aeneid,  though  thus  left  unfinished,  and  though  Hable 
to  the  charge  of  close  imitation  of  Homer  in  many  passages, 
and  of  borrowing  not  a  Httle  from  earlier  Roman  poets,  has 
nevertheless  always  been,  and  always  will  be  considered  one 
of  the  noblest  jjoems  of  antiquity. 

Virgil  found  some  difficulty  in  making  the  calm  excellences 
of  goodness  and  piety,  with  which  he  wished  to  charactcrize 
his  most  prominent  personage,  appear  heroic  and  striking ;  and, 
like  Milton,  he  has  froiti  the  necessity  of  the  case  suffered  the 
fury  and  unbridled  passion  of  some  of  his  characters  to  raake 
a  more  lively  and  enduring  impression  than  the  central  per- 
sonage  of  his  poem.  For  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  Turnus 
of  the  Aeneid,  and  the  Satan  of  Paradise  Lost,  take  a  moro 
powerful  hold  upon  our  imaginations,  and  come  uearer  to 
Homer's  conception  of  a  hero,  than  the  calra  majesty  of  Mil- 
tor's  Saviour,  or  thc  patient  sufiering  and  religious  obedienco 
of  Virgil's  Aeneas. 


XVlll  LIFE   AKD   WRITmGS    OF    VIKGIL. 

But  T/hatcver  defects  tbere  may  be  in  tlie  Aeneid,  it  is  re- 
plete  with  all  tbe  qualities  wliicli  are  essential  to  a  great  work 
of  art.  It  is  great  in  conceptioii  and  invention.  It  is  won- 
derfully  diversified  in  scenes,  incidents,  and  characters,  while 
it  never  departs  from  the  vital  principle  of  unity.  It  is 
adorned  with  the  finest  diction  and  imagery  of  wliicli  lan- 
guage  is  capable.  In  discoursing  of  great  achievements  and 
great  events,  it  ucver  comes  short  of  the  grandeur  which  be- 
fits  the  epic  style  ;  in  passages  of  sorrow  and  suffering  it  takes 
hold  of  our  sympathies  with  all  the  power  of  the  most  heart- 
rending  tragedy,  What  a  sublime  epic  of  itself  is  the  account 
of  the  sack  of  Troy !  what  a  tragedy  of  j^assion  and  fate  is 
presented  in  the  death  of  Dido  !  Lideed  the  student  will  find 
in  the  Aeneid  many  dramatic  scenes,  many  vivid  pictures  of 
life  and  manners,  many  lively  narratives  of  adventure,  any  one 
of  which  would  be  of  itself  a  poem,  and  would^secure  to  its 
author  an  enviable  fame. 

Of  the  preeminent  worth  of  Virgil's  pocms,  and  of  their 
importance  as  literary  studies,  the  most  striking  proof  is  pre- 
sented  in  the  fact  that  so  many  of  the  classics  of  modern 
poetry,  in  all  cultivated  languages,  havc  manifestly  been  pro- 
duccd  under  the  moulding  and  refining  influence  of  this  great 
master  of  the  art.  Dante,  who  felt  all  the  power  of  "  the 
Mantuan,"  ascribes  to  him  whatever  excellence  he  has  himself 
attained  in  beauty  of  style ;  and,  in  the  generous  avowal  of 
his  indebtedness,  he  utters  one  of  the  noblest  eulogies  ever 
bestowcd  by  auy  poet  upon  a  brother  poet. 

Oh  (lelli  altri  poeti  onore  e  lume  \, 

Vagliami  '1  lungo  studio,  e  il  grande  amore, 
Clie  nii  han  fatto  cercar  lo  tuo  volume ! 

Tu  sei  lo  niio  maestro  e  il  mio  autore : 
Tu  sei  solo  colui,  da  cu'  io  tolsi 
Lo  bcllo  stile,  clie  mi  a  fatto  onore.* 

*  Danto"8  InJerno.    Canto  L 


YIEGIL. 


Ille  cgo,  qui  quondam  gracili  modulatics  avena 
Carmen,  et,  egressus  sihis,  meina  coegi 
Ut  quamvis  avido  parerent  arva  colono,  ^  ^ 

Gratum  opus  agricolis,  at  nunc  Jiorrentia  Martzs. 


P.  VIRGILII  MARONIS 

AENEIDOS 

LIBEE  PEIMUS. 


Arma  virumque  cano,  Trojae  qui  primus  ab  oris 

Italiam  fato  profugus  Lavinaque  venit 

Litora,  multum  ille  et  terris  jactatus  et  alto 

Vi  superiim  saevae  memorem  Junonis  ob  iram, 

Multa  quoq[ue  et  bello  passus,  dum  conderet  urbem         5 

Inferretque  deos  Latio  :  genus  unde  Latinum 

Albanique  patres  atque  altae  moenia  Eomae, 

Miisa,  mihi  causas  memora,  quo  numine  laeso, 
Quidve  dolens  regiiia  deum  tot  volvere  casus 
Insignem  pietate  virum,  tot  adire  labores  10 

Impulerit.     Tantaene  animis  coelestibus  irae  ? 

Urbs  antiqua  fuit-Tyrii  tenuere  coloni-, 
Cartbago,  Italiam  contra  Tiberinaqiue  longe 
Ostia,  dives  opum  studiisque  asperrima  belli, 
Quam  Juno  fertur  terris  magis  omnibus  unam  15 

Posthabita  coluisse  Samo  :  hic  illius  arma, 
Hic  currus  fuit ;  hoc  regnum  dea  gentibus  esse, 
Si  qua  fata  sinant,  jam  tum  tenditque  fovetque. 
Progeniem  sed  enim  Trojano  a  sanguine  duci 
Audierat,  Tyrias  olim  quae  verteret  arces  ;  20 

Hinc  populum  latc  rcgem  bclloque  superbum 


4  AENEIDOS   LIB.    I. 

Venturum  excidio  Libyae  :  sic  volvere  Parcas. 
Id  metuens  veterisque  memor  Saturnia  belli, 
Prima  quod  ad  Trojam  pro  caris  gesserat  Argis— 
Nec  dum  etiam  causae  irarum  saevique  dolores  25 

Exciderant  animo  ;  manet  alta  mente  repostum 
Judicium  Paridis  spretaeque  injuria  formae, 
Et  genus  invisum,  et  rapti  Ganymedis  honores:^ 
His  accensa  super,  jactatos  aequore  toto 
Troas,  reliquias  Danaum  atque  immitis  Acbilli,  30 

Arcebat  longe  Latio  ;  multosque  per  annos 
Errabant  acti  fatis  maria  omnia  circum. 
Tantae  molis  erat  Komanam  condere  gentem. 
Vix  e  conspectu  Siculae  telluris  in  altum 
Vela  dabant  laeti  et  spumas  salis  aere  ruebant,  35 

Quum  Juno,  aeternum  servans  sub  pectore  vulnus, 
Haec  secum  :  "  Mene  incepto  desistere  victam, 
"  Nec  posse  Italia  Teucrorum  avertere  regem  ? 
"  Quippe  vetor  fatis.     Pallasne  exurere  classem 
"  Argivtim  atque  ipsos  potuit  submergere  ponto.  40 

"  Unius  ob  noxam  et  furias  Ajacis  Oilei  ? 
"  Ipsa,  Jovis  rapidum  jaculata  e  nubibus  ignem, 
"  Disjecitque  rates  evertitque  aequora  ventis  ; 
"  Illum  exspirantem  transfixo  pectore  flammas 
"  Turbine  corripuit,  scopuloque  infixit  acuto.  .  45 

"  Ast  ego,  quae  divum  incedo  regina,  Jovisque 
"  Et  soror  et  conjux,  una  cum  gente  tot  annos 
"  Bella  gero  ?     Et  quisquam  nuniren  Junonis  adorat 
"  Praeterea,  aut  supplex  aris  imponet  bonorem  ?  " 
Talia  flammato  secum  dea  corde  volutans  50 

Nimborum  in  patriam,  loca  feta  furentibus  Austris, 
Aeoliam  venit.     Hic  vasto  rex  Aeolus  antro 
Luctantes  ventos  tempestate^que  sonoras 
Imperio  premit,  ac  vihclis  et  carcere  frenat. 
Tlli  indignantes,  raagno  cum  murmure  montis,  55 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    I.  5 

Circum  claustra  fremunt ;  celsa  sedet  Aeolus  arce, 

Sceptra  tenens,  mollitque  animos  et  temperat  iras  :  i^ 

Ni  faciat,  maria  ac  terras  coelumque  profundum 

Quippe  ferant  rapidi  secum  verrantque  per  auras. 

Sed  pater  omnipotens  speluncis  abdidit  atris,  60 

Hoc  metuens,  molemque  et  montes  insuper  altos 

Imposuit,  regemque  dedit,  qui  foedere  certo 

Et  premere  et  laxas  sciret  dare  jussus  liabenas. 

Ad  quem  tum  Juno  supplex  liis  vocibus  usa  est :  - 

"  Aeole-namque  tibi  divum  pater  atque  bominum  rex    65 

"  Et  mulcere  dedit  fluctus  et  tollere  vento-, 

"  Gens  inimica  mihi  Tyrrlienum  navigat  aequor, 

"  Uium  in  Italiam  portans  victosque  Penates  : 

"  Incute  vim  ventis  submersasque  obrue  puppes, 

"  Aut  age  diversos  et  disjice  corpora  ponto.  70 

"  Sunt  miki  bis  septem  praestanti  corpore  Nymphae, 

"  Quarum,  quae  forma  pulcherrima  Deiopea, 

"  Connubio  jungam  stabili  propriamque  dicabo, 

"  Omnes  ut  tecum  meritis  pro  talibus  annos 

"  Exigat,et  pulchra  faciat  te  prole  parentem."  75 

Aeolus  haec  contra  :  "  Tuus,  o  regina,  quid  optes, 

"  Explorare  labor,  mihi  jussa  capessere  fas  est. 

"  Tu  mihi,  quodcumque  hoc  regni,  tu  sceptra  Jovemque 

"  Concilias,  tu  das  epulis  accumbere  divtim, 

"  Nimborumque  facis  tempestatumque  potentem."         80 

Haec  ubi  dicta,  cavum  conversa  cuspide  montem 

Impulit  in  latus,  ac  venti,  velut  agmine  facto, 

Qua  data  porta,  ruunt  et  terras  turbine  perflant. 

Incubuere  mari,  totumque  e  sedibus  imis 

Una  Eumsque  Notusque  ruunt  creberque  procellis         85 

Africus,  et  vastos  volvunt  ad  litora  fluctus. 

Insequitur  clamorque  virum  stridorque  rudentum. 

Eripiunt  subito  nubes  coelumque  diemque 

Teucrorum  ex  oculis  :  ponto  nox  incubat  atra ; 


0  AENEIDOS    LIB.    I. 

Intonuere  poli,  et  crebris  micat  ignibus  aether,  90 

Praesentemque  viris  intentant  omnia  mortem. 

Extemplo  Aeneae  solvuntur  frigore  membra  ; 

Ingemit  et,  duplices  tenclens  ad  sidera  palmas, 

Talia  voce  refert  :  "  0  terque  quaterquc  beati, 

"  Quis  ante  ora  patrum  Trojae  sub  moenibus  altis  95 

"  Contigit  oppetere  !     O  Danaum  fortissime  gentis, 

*'  Tydide,  mene  Iliacis  occumbere  campis 

"  Non  potuisse,  tuaque  animam  hanc  effundere  dextra  : , 

'^  Saevus  ubi  Aeacidae  telo  jacet  Hector,  ubi  ingens 

"  Sarpedon,  ubi  tot  Simois  correpta  sub  undis  100 

"  Scuta  virum  galeasque  et  fortia  corpora  volvit  ?  "  , 

Talia  jactanti  stridens  Aquilone  procella 

Vebim  adversa  ferit,  fluctusque  ad  sidera  tollit. 

Franguntur  remi ;  tum  proram  avertit  et  undis 

Dat  latus ;  insequitur  cumulo  praeruptus  aquae  mons.  ]  05 

Hi  summo  in  fluctu  pendent,  his  UEida  dehiscens 

Terram  inter  fluctus  aperit;furit  aestus  arenis. 

Tres  Notus  abreptas  in  saxa  latentia  torquet- 

Saxa  vocant  Itali,  mediis   quae  in  fluctibus,  Aras; 

Dorpum  immane  mari  summo-  ;  tres  Eurus  ab  alto      110 

In  orevia  et  syrtes  urget-miserabile  visu-, 

Illiditque  vadis  atque  aggere  cingit  arenae.  -^ 

Unam,  quae  Lycios  fidumque  vehebat  Oronten, 

Ipsius  ante  oculos  ingens  a  vertice  pontus 

In  puppim  ferit :  excutitur  pronusque  magister  115 

Volvitur  in  caput,  ast  illam  ter.fluctus  ibidem 

Torquet  agens  circum  et  rapidus  vorat  aequore  vertex ; 

Apparent  rari  nantes  in  gurgite  vasto, 

Arma  viri(im  tabulaeque  et  Troja  gaza  per  undas, 

Jam  validam  Ilionei  navem,  jam  fortis  Achatae,  120 

Et  qua  vectus  Abas,  et  qua  grandaevus  Aletes, 

Vicit  hiems  :  laxis  laterum  compagibus  omnes 

Accipiunt  inimicum  imbrem  rimisque  fatiscunt. 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    I, 


Interea  magno  misceri  murmure  pontum, 
Emissamque  hiemem  sensit  Neptunus  et  imis  125 

Stagna  refusa  vadis,  graviter  commotus  ;  et  alto 
Prospiciens,  summa  placidum  caput  extulit  unda.  , 
Disjectam  Aeneae  toto  videt  aequore  classem, 
Fluctibus  oppressos  Troas  coelique  ruina  ; 
Nec  latuere  doli  fratrem  Junonis  et  irae.  130 

Eurum  ad  se  Zepliyrumque  vocat,  dehinc  talia  fatur  : 
"  Tantane  vos  generis  tenuit  fiducia  vestri  ? 
"  Jam  coelum  terramque  meo  sine  numine,  Venti, 
'^  Miscere  et  tantas  audetis  tollere  moles  ? 
"  Quos  ego —  !  Sed  motos  praestat  componere  fluctus  ;  135 
"  Post  mibi  non  simili  poena  commissa  luetis. 
"  Maturate  fugam,  regique  baec  dicite  vestro, 
"  Non  illi  imperium  pelagi  saevumque  tridentem, 
"  Sed  mibi  sorte  datum.     Tenet  ille  immania  saxa, 
"  Vestras,  Eure,  domos  :  illa  se  jactet  in  aula  140 

"  Aeolus,  et  clauso  ventorum  carcere  regnet." .^ 
Sic  ait,  et  dicto  citius  tumida  aequora  placat, 
CoUectasque  ftigat  nubes  solemque  reducit. 
Cymotboe  simul  et  Triton  annixus  acuto 
Detrudunt  naves  scopulo  ;  levat  ipse  tridenti,  145 

Et  vastas  aperit  Syrtes,  et  temperat  aequor, 
Atque  rotis  summas  levibus  perlabitur  undas. 
Ac  veluti  magno  in  populo  quum  saepe  coorta  est 
Seditio,  saevitque  animis  ignobile  vulgus, 
Jamque  faces  et  saxa  volant,  furor  arma  ministrat  ;     150 
Tum,  pietate  gravem  ac  meritis  si  forte  virum  quem 
Conspexere,  silent  arrectisque  auribus  adstant, 
Ille  regit  dictis  animos,  et  pectora  mulcet  : 
Sic  cunctus  pelagi  cecidit  fragor,  aequora  postquam 
Prospiciens  genitor,  coeloque  invectus  aperto,  155 

Flectit  equos,  curruque  volans  dat  lora  secundo.  ^ 
Defessi  Aeneadae,  quae  proxima  litora,  cursii 


8  AENEIDOS   LIB.    I, 

Contendunt  petere,  et  Libyae  vertuntur  ad  oras. 

Est  in  secessu  longo  locus :  insula  portum 

Efficit  objectu  laterum,  quibus  omnis  ab  alto  16C 

Frangitur  inque  sinus  scindit  sese  unda  reductos. 

Hinc  atque  liinc  vastae  rupes  geminique  minantur 

In  coelum  scopuli^  quorum  sub  vertice  late 

Aequora  tuta  silent ;  tum  silvis  scena  coruscis 

Desuper  liorrentique  atrum  nemus  imminet  umbra.      165 

Fronte  sub  adversa  scopulis  pendentibus  antrum  ; 

Intus  aquae  dulces  vivoque  sedilia  saxo, 

Nympbarum  domus.     Hic  fessas  non  vincula  naves 

Ulla  tenent,  unco  non  aUigat  ancora  morsu. 

Huc  septem  Aeneas  coUectis  navibus  omni  170 

Ex  numero  subit,  ac  magno  telluris  amore 

Egressi  optata  potiuntur  Troes  arena, 

Et  sale  tabentes  artus  in  litore  ponunt.  . 

Ac  primum  silici  scintillam  excudit  Acbates, 

Suscepitque  ignem  foliis,  atque  arida  circum  175 

Nutrimenta  dedit,  rapuitque  in  fomite  flammam  ; 

Tum  Cererem  corruptam  undis  Cerealiaque  arma 

Expediunt  fessi  rerum,  frugesque  receptas 

Et  torrere  parant  flammis  et  frangere  saxo.   «^ 

Aeneas  scopulum  interea  conscendit  et  omnem  180 

Prospectum  late  pelago  petit,  Antbea  si  quem 

Jactatum  vento  videat  Pbrygiasque  biremes, 

Aut  Capyn,  aut  celsis  in  puppibus  arma  Caici. 

Navem  in  conspectu  nuUam,  tres  litore  cervos 

Prospicit  errantes  ;  bos  tota  armenta  sequuntur  185 

A  tergo,  et  longum  per  valles  pascitur  agmen. 

Constitit  bic,  arcumque  manu  celeresque  sagittas 

Corripuit,  fidus  quae  tela  gerebat  Acbates, 

Ductoresque  ipsos  primum,  capita  alta  ferentes 

Cornibus  arboreis,  sternit,  tum  vulgus,  et  omnem         190 

Miscet  agens  tebs  nemora  inter  frondea  turbam  ; 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    I.  9 

Nec  prius  absistit,  quarn  septem  ingentia  victor 
Corpora  fundat  humi  et  numerum  cum  navibus  aequet. 
Hinc  portum  petit,  et  socios  partitur  in  omnes. 
Vina  bonus  quae  deinde  cadis  onerarat  Acestes  195 

Litore  Trinacrio  dederatque  abeuntibus  lieros, 
Dividit,  et  dictis  maerentia  pectora  mulcet  : 
'  0  socii-neque  enim  ignari  sumus  ante  malorum-, 
'  0  passi  graviora,  dabit  deus  his  quoque  finem. 
'  Vos  et  Scyllaeam  rabiem  penitusque  sonantes  200 

'  Accestis  scopulos,  vos  et  Cyclopia  saxa 
'  Experti.     Kevocate  animos,  maestumque  timorem 
'  Mittite  :  forsan  et  haec  olim  meminisse  juvabit. 
'  Per  varios  casus,  per  tot  discrimina  rerum 
'  Tendimus  in  Latium,  sedes  ubi  fata  quietas  205 

'  Ostendunt  :  illic  fas  regna  resurgere  Trojae. 
'  Durate,  et  vosmet  rebus  servate  secundis." 
Talia  voce  refert  ;  curisque  ingentibus  aeger 
Spem  vultu  simulat,  premit  altum  corde  dolorem. 
Illi  se  praedae  accingunt  dapibusque  futuris  :  210 

Tergora  deripiunt  costis  et  viscera  nudant ; 
Pars  in  frusta  secant  veribusque  trementia  figunt ; 
Litore  aena  locant  ahi  flammasque  ministrant. 
Tum  victu  revocant  vires,  fusique  per  herbam 
Implentur  veteris  Bacchi  j)inguisque  ferinae.  215 

Postquam  exemta  fames  epulis,  mensaeque  remotae ; 
Amissos  longo  socios  sermone  requirunt, 
Spemque  metumque  inter  dubii,  seu  vivere  credant, 
Sive  extrema  pati  nec  jam  exaudire  vocatos. 
Praecipue  pius  Aeneas  nunc  acris  Oronti,  220 

Nunc  Amyci  casum  gemit  et  crudelia  secum 
Fata  Lyci,  fortemque  Gyan,  fortemque  Cloanthum. 
Et  jam  finis  erat,  quum  Jupiter,  aethere  summo 
Despiciens  mare  velivolum  terrasque  jacentes 
Litoriaque  et  latos  populos,  sic  vertice  coeli  225 


10  AENEIDOS    LIB,    I. 

Constitit  et  Libyae  defixit  lumina  regnis. 
Atque  illum,  tales  jactantem  pectore  curas, 
Tristior  et  lacrimis  oculos  sufiusa  nitentes 
Alloquitur  Venus  :  "  0  qui  res  hominumque  deumque 
"  Aeternis  regis  imperiis  et  fulmine  terres,  230 

'•  Quid  meus  Aeneas  in  te  committere  tantum, 
"  Quid  Troes  potuere,  quibus,  tot  funera  passis, 
"  Cunctus  ob  Italiam  terrarum  clauditur  orbis  ? 
"  Certe  hinc  Komanos  olim,  volventibus  annis, 
"  Hinc  fore  ductores,  revocato  a  sanguine  Teucri,         235 
"  Qui  mare,  qui  terras  omni  dicione  tenerent, 
"  PoUicitus,  quae  te,  genitor,  sententia  vertit  ? 
"  Hoc  equidem  occasum  Trojae  tristesque  ruinas 
"  Solabar,  fatis  contraria  fata  rependens  ; 
"  Nunc  eadem  fortuna  viros  tot  casibus  actos  240 

"  Insequitur.     Qucm  das  finem,  rex  magne,  laborum  ?  . 
"  Antenor  potuit,  mediis  elapsus  Achivis, 
"  IUyricos  penetrare  sinus  atque  intima  tutus 
Regna  Liburnorum,  et  fontem  superare  Timavi, 
Unde  per  ora  novem  vasto  cum  murmure  montis      245 
"  It  mare  proruptum  et  pelago  premit  arva  sonanti. 
"  Hic  tamen  ille  urbem  Patavi  sedesque  locavit 
"  Teucrorum,  et  genti  nomen  dedit  armaque  fixit 
"  Troia;  nunc  placida  compostus  pace  quiescit ; 
"  Nos,  tua  progenies,  coeli  quibus  annuis  arcem,  250 

"  Navibus-infandum  !-amissis,  unius  ob  iram 
"  Prodimur,  atque  Italis  longe  disjungimur  oris. 
"  Hic  pietatis  honos  ?  Sic  nos  in  sceptra  reponis  ?  " 
Olli  subridens  hominum  sator  atque  deorum 
Vultu,  quo  coelum  tempestatesque  serenat,  255 

Oscula  libavit  natae,  dehinc  talia  fatur  : 
"  Parce  mctu,  Cytherca  :  mancnt  immota  tuorum 
"  Pata  tibi ;  cernes  urbem  et  promissa  Lavini 
''  Moenia,  sublimemque  feres  aJ  sidera  coeli 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    I,  11 

"  Magnanimunv  Aenean,  neque  me  sententia  vertit.      26C 

"  Hic-tibi  fabor  enim,  quando  liaec  te  cura  remordet, 

"  Longius  et  volvens  fatorum  arcana  movebo- 

"  Bellum  ingens  geret  Italia,  populosque  feroces 

'^  Contundet,  morescj[uc  viris  et  moenia  ponet, 

"  Tertia  dum  Latio  regnantem  viderit  aestas,  265 

"  Ternaque  transierint  Eutulis  hiberna  subactis. 

"  At  puer  Ascanius,  cui  nunc  cognomen  lulo 

"  Additur-Ilus  erat,  dum  res  stetit  Ilia  regno-, 

"  Triginta  magnos  volvendis  mensibus  orbes 

"  Imperio  explebit,  regnumque  ab  sede  Lavinl  270 

"  Transferet,  et  Longam  multa  vi  muniet  Albam. 

"  Hic  jam  ter  centum  totos  regnabitur  annos 

"  Gente  sub  Hectorea,  donec  regiria  sacerdos 

"  Marte  gravis  geminam  partu  dabit  Ilia  prolem. 

"  Inde  lupae  fulvo  nutricis  tegmine  laetus  275 

"  Eomulus  excipiet  gentem,  et  Mavortia  condet 

"  Moenia,  Eomanosque  suo  de  nomine  dicet. 

"  His  ego  nec  metas  rerum  nec  tempora  pono  : 

"  Imperium  sine  fine  dedi.     Quin  aspera  Jano, 

"  Quac  marc  nunc  terrasque  metu  coelumque  fatigat,  280 

"  Consilia  in  melius  referet,  mecumque  fovebit 

"  Eomanos,  rerum  dominos  gentemque  togatam.  ^ 

"  Sic  placitum.     Veniet  lustris  labentibus  aetas, 

"  Quum  domus  Assaraci  Ph.tliiam  clarasque  Mycenas 

"  Servitio  premet  ac  victis  dominabitur  Argis.  285 

"  Nascetur  pulchra  Trojanus  origine  Caesar, 

"  Imperium  Oceano,  famam  qui  terminet  astris, 

"  Julius,  a  magno  demissum  nomen  lulo  : 

"  Hunc  tu  olim  coelo,  spoliis  Orientis  onustum, 

"  Accipies  secura  ;  vocabitur  bic  quoque  votis.  290 

"  Aspera  tum  positis  mitescent  secula  bellis  ; 

"  Cana  Fides,  et  Vesta,  Eemo  cum  fratre  Quirinus, 

''  Jura  dabuut ;  dirae  ferro  et  compagibus  artis 


12  AENEIDOS    LIB.    I. 

'*  Claudentur  Belli  portae  ;  Furor  impius  intus, 

"  Saevasedens  superarma,  et  centum  vinctus  aenis      29,1 

*'  Post  tergum  nodis,  fremet  liorridus  ore  cruento." 

Haec  ait,  et  Maia  genitum  demittit  ab  alto, 

Ut  terrae,  utque  novae  pateant  Carthaginis  arces 

Hospitio  Teucris,  ne  fati  nescia  Dido 

Finibus  arceret.     Volat  ille  per  aera  magnum  300 

Remigio  alarum,  ac  Libyae  citus  adstitit  oris ; 

Et  jam  jussa  facit,  ponuntque  ferocia  Poeni 

Corda  volente  deo  ;  in  primis  regina  quietum 

Accipit  in  Teucros  animum  mentemque  benignam. 

At  pius  Aeneas,  per  noctem  plurima  volvens,  305 

Ut  primum  lux  alma  data  est,  exire  locosque 
Explorare  novos,  quas  vento  accesserit  oras, 
Qui  teneant-nam  inculta  videt-,  hominesne  feraene, 
Quaerere  constituit,  sociisque  exacta  referre. 
Classem  in  convexo  nemorum  sub  rupe  cavata  310 

Arboribus  clausam  circum  atque  horrentibus  umbris 
Occulit:  ipse  uno  graditur  comitatus  Achate, 
Bina  manu  lato  crispans  hastilia  ferro. 
Cui  mater  media  sese  tulit  obvia  silva, 
Virginis  os  habitumque  gerens  et  virginis  arma  315 

Spartanae,  vel  qualis  equos  Threissa  fatigat 
Harpaljce  volucremque  fuga  praevertitur  Hebrum  : 
Namque  humeris  de  more  habilem  suspenderat  arcum 
Venatrix,  dederatque  comam  diifundere  ventis, 
Nuda  genu,  nodoque  sinus  coUecta  fluentes.  320 

Ac  prior  "  Heus  "  inquit  "  juvenes,  monstrate,  mearum 
"  Vidistis  si  quam  hic  errantem  forte  sororum, 
*'  Succinctam  pharetra  et  maculosae  tegmine  lyncis, 
"  Aut  spumantis  apri  cursum  clamore  prementem."  - 
Sio  Venus,  et  Veneris  contra  sic  iilius  orsus  :  325 

"  Nulla  tuarum  audita  mihi  neque  visa  sororum, 
"  0 — quam  te  memorem,  virgo  ?  namque  haud  tibi  vultus 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    I.  13 

"  Mortalis^  nec  vox  hominem  sonat.     0  dea  certe ; 

"  An  Phoebi  soror  ?   an  Nympharum  sanguinis  una  ? 

"  Sis  felix,  nostrumque  leves,  quaecumque,  laborem,    330 

"  Et,  quo  sub  coelo  tandem,  quibus  orbis  in  oris 

"  Jactemur,  doceas  ;  ignari  bominumque  locorumque 

"  Erramus,  vento  h.uc  vastis  et  fluctibus  acti. 

"  Multa  tibi  ante  aras  nostra  cadet  hostia  dextra." 

Tum  Venus  :  "  Haud  equidem  tali  me  dignor  honore  ;  335 

"  Virginibus  Tyriis  mos  est  gestare  pharetram, 

"  Purpureoque  alte  suras  vincire  cothurno. 

"  Punica  regna  vides,  Tyrios  et  Agenoris  urbem  ; 

"  Sed  fines  Libyci,  genus  intractabile  bello. 

"  Imperium  Dido  Tyria  regit  urbe  profecta,  340 

"  Germanum  fugiens.     Longa  est  injuria,  longae 

"  Ambages  ;  sed  summa  sequar  fastigia  rerum. 

"  Huic  conjux  Sychaeus  erat,  ditissimus  agri 

"  Phoenicum  et  magno  miserae  dilectus  amore, 

"  Cui  pater  intactam  dederat  primisque  jugarat     ■•      345 

"  Ominibus.  .  Sed  regna  Tyri  germanus  habebat 

"  Pygmalion,  scelere  ante  alios  immanior  omnes. 

"  Quos  inter  medius  venit  furor  :  ille  Sychaeum 

"  Impius  ante  aras  atque  auri  caecus  amore 

"  Clam  ferro  incautum  superat,  securus  amorum  350 

"  Germanae,  factumque  diu  celavit  et  aegram, 

"  Multa  malus  simulans,  vana  spe  lusit  amantem. 

"  Ipsa  sed  in  somnis  inhumati  venit  imago 

"  Conjugis,  ora  modis  attoUens  paUida  miris,  , 

"  Crudeles  aras  trajectaque  pectora  ferro  355 

"  Nudavit,  caecumque  domus  scelus  omne  retexit; 

"  Tum  celerare  fugam  patriaque  excedere  suadet, 

"  Auxihumque  viae  veteres  tellure  recludit 

"  Thesauros,  ignotum  argenti  pondus  et  auri. 

"  His  commota  fugam  Dido  sociosque  parabat.  360 

'*  Conveniunt,  quibus  aut  odium  crudele  tyranni 


14  AENEIDOS    LIB.    I. 

"  Aut  metus  acer  erat ;  naves,  quae  forte  paratae, 

"  Corripiunt  onerantque  auro  :  portantur  avari 

"  Pygmalionis  opes  pelago  ;  dux  foemina  facti.  --j. 

"  Devenere  locos,  ubi  nunc  ingentia  cernis  365 

"  Moenia  surgentemque  novae  Carthaginis  arcern, 

"  Mercatique  solum,  facti  de  nomine  Byrsam, 

"  Taurino  quantum  possent  circumdare  tergo... 

"  Sed  vos  qui  tandem,  quibus  aut  venistis  ab.oris, 

"  Quove  tenetis  iter  ?  "     Quaerenti  talibus  ille  370 

Suspirans  iuioque  trabens  a  pectore  vocem  : 

"  0  dea,  si  prima  repetens  ab  origine  pergam, 

"  Et  vacet  annales  nostrorum  audire  laborum, 

"  Ante  diem  clauso  componfet  Yesper  Olympo. 

"  Nos  Troja  antiqua,  si  vestras  forte  per  aures  375 

"  Trqjae  nomen  iit,  diversa  per  aequora  vectos 

"  Forte  sua  Libycis  tempestas  appulit  oris. 

"  Sum  pius  Aeneas,  raptos  qui  ex  lioste  Penates 

"  Classe  vebo  mecum,  fama  super  aetliera  notus  ; 

"  Italiam  quaero  patriam  et  genus  ab  Jove  summo.      380 

"  Bis  denis  Phrygium  conscendi  navibus  aequor, 

'■  Matre  dea  moustrante  viam,  data  fata  secutus ; 

"  Vix  septem  convulsae  undis  Euroque  supersunt. 

"  Ipse  ignotus,  egens,  Libyae  deserta  peragro, 

"  Europa  atque  Asia  pulsus.^-j^Isrec  plura  querentem  385 

Passa  Venus  medio  sic  interfata  dolore  est : 

"  Quisquis  es,  baud,  credo,  invisus  coelestibus  auras 

"  Vitales  carpis,  Tyriam  qui  adveneris  urbem. 

"  Pcrge  modo,  atc[ue  hinc  te  reginae  ad  limina  perfer. 

"  Namque  tibi  reduces  socios  classemque  relatam        390 

"  Nuntio  et  in  tutum  versis  Aquilonibus  actam, 

"  Ni  frustra  augurium  vani  docuere  parentes. 

"  Adspice  bis  senos  lactantcs  agminc  cycnos, 

"  Aetheria  quos  lapsa  plaga  Jovis  ales  aperto 

"  Turbabat  coelo  ;  nunc  terras  ordine  longo  395 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    I,  15 

"  Aut  capere  aut  captas  jam  despectare  videntur. 

"  Ut  reduces  illi  ludunt  stridentibus  alis, 

''  Et  coetu  cinxere  polum,  cantusque  dedere  ; 

"  Haud  aliter  puppesq[ue  tuae  pubesque  tuorum 

"  Aut  portum  tenet,  aut  pleno  subit  ostia  velo.  400 

"  Perge  modo  et,  qua  te  ducit  via,  dirige  gressum."  '-54. 

Dixit,  et  avertens  rosea  cervice  refulsit, 

Ambrosiaeque  comae  divinum  vertice  odorem 

Spiravere  ;  pedes  vestis  defluxit  ad  imos  ; 

Et  vera  incessu  patuit  dea.     lUe  ubi  matrem  405 

Agnovit,  tali  fugienteni  est  voce  secutus  : 

"  Quid  natum  toties,  crudelis  tu  quoque,  falsis 

"  Ludis  imaginibus  ?     Cur  de^trae  jungere  dextram 

"  Non  datur,  ac  veras  audire  et  reddere  voces  ?  " 

Talibus  incusat,  gressumque  ad  moenia  tendit ;  410 

At  Venus  obscuro  gradientes  aere  sepsit, 

Et  multo  nebulae  circum  dea  fudit  amictu, 

Cernere  ne  quis  eos,  neu  quis  contingere  posset, 

Molirive  moram,  aut  veniendi  poscere  causas.    - 

Ipsa  Paphum  sublimis  abit,  sedesque  revisit  415 

Laeta  suas,  ubi  templum  iUi,  centumque  Sabaeo 

Ture  calent  arae  sertisque  recentibus  balant. 

Corripuere  viam  interea,  qua  semita  monstrat ; 
Jamque  adscendebant  coUem,  qui  plurimus  urbi 
Imminet,  adversasque  adspectat  desuper  arces.  420 

Miratur  molem  Aeneas,  magaUa  quondam, 
Miratur  portas  strcpitumque  et  strata  viarum, 
Instant  ardentes  Tyrii,  pars  ducere  muros 
MoUrique  arcem  et  manibus  subvolvere  saxa, 
Pars  optare  locum  tecto  et  concludere  sulco  ;  425 

Jura  magistratusque  legunt  sanctumque  senatum ; 
Hic  portus  aUi  efibdiunt ;  hic  alta  tbeatri 
Fundamenta  locant  aUi,  immanesque  columnas 
Eupibus  excidunt,  scenis  decora  alta  futuris : 


16  AENEIDOS    LIB.    I. 

Qualis  apes  aestate  nova  per  florea  rura  430 

Exercet  sub  sole  labor,  quum  gentis  adultos 

Educunt  fetus,  aut  quum  liquentia  mella 

Stipant  et  dulci  distendunt  nectare  cellas, 

Aut  onera  accipiunt  venientum,  aut  agmine  facto 

Ignavum  fucos  pecus  a  praesepibus  arcent ;  435 

Fervet  opus,  redolentque  thymo  fragrantia  mella. 

"  0  fortunati,  quorum  jam  moenia  surgunt  !  " 

Aeneas  ait,  et  fastigia  suspicit  urbis. 

Infert  se  septus  nebula-mirabile  dictu- 

Per  medios,  miscetque  viris,  neque  cernitur  ulli.  440 

Lucus  in  urbe  fuit  media,  laetissimus  umbra, 
Quo  primum,  jactati  undis  et  turbine,  Poeni 
Effodere  loco  signum,  quod  regia  Juno 
Monstrarat,  caput  acris  equi :  sic  nam  fore  bello 
Egregiam  et  facilem  victu  per  saecula  gentem.  ^.  445 

Hic  templum  Junoni  ingens  Sidonia  Dido 
Condebat,  donis  opulentum  et  numine  divae, 
Aerea  cui  gradibus  surgebant  limina,  nexaeque 
Aere  trabes,  foribus  cardo  stridebat  ahenis. 
Hoc  primum  in  luco  nova  res  oblata  timorem  450 

Leniit,  bic  primum  Aeneas  sperare  salutem 
Ausus,  et  afflictis  melius  confidere  rebus : 
Namque  sub  ingenti  lustrat  dum  singula  templo, 
Reginam  opperiens,  dum,  quae  fortuna  sit  urbi, 
Artificumque  manus  inter  se  operumque  laborem  455 

Miratur,  videt  Iliacas  ex  ordine  pugnas 
Bellaque  jam  fama  totum  vulgata  j^cr  orbem, 
Atridas  Priamumque  et  saevum  ambobus  Acbillen. 
Constitit  et  lacrimans  "Quis  jam  locus"  inquit  "  Achate, 
"  Quae  regio  in  terris  nostri  non  plena  laboris  ?  460 

"  En  Priamus  !   Sunt  hic  etiam  sua  praemia  laudi ; 
''  Sunt  lacrimae  rerum,  et  mentem  mortalia  tangunt, 
'*  Solve  metus  :  feret  haec  aliquam  tibi  fama  salutem." 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    I.  17 

Sic  ait,  atque  animum  pictura  pascit  inani, 

Multa  gemens,  largoque  humectat  flumine  vultum.      465 

Namque  viclebat,  uti  bellantes  Peigama  circum 

Hac  fugerent  Graii,  premeret  Trojana  juventus  ; 

Hac  Phryges,  instaret  curru  cristatus  Achilles. 

Nec  procul  hinc  Ehesi  niveis  tentoria  velis 

Agnoscit  lacrimans,  primo  quae  proclita  somno  470 

Tydides  multa  vastabat  caede  cruentus, 

Ard^tesque  avertit  equos  in  castra,  priusquam 

Pabula  gustassent  Trojae  Xanthumque  bibissent, 

Parte  alia  fugiens  amissis  Troilus  armis, 

Infelix  puer  atque  impar  congressus  Achilli,  475 

Fertur  equis,  curruque  haeret  resupinus  inani, 

Lora  tenens  tamen :  huic  cervixque  comaeque  trahuntur 

Per  terram,  et  versa  pulvis  inscribitur  hasta. 

Interea  ad  templum  non  aequae  Palladis  ibant 

Crinibus  Iliades  passis,  pejDlumque  ferebant,  480 

Suppliciter  tristes  et  tunsae  pectora  palmis  ; 

Diva  solo  fixos  oculos  aversa  tenebat. 

Ter  circum  Iliacos  raptaverat  Hectora  muros 

Exanimumque  auro  corpus  vendebat  Achilles, 

Tum  vero  ingentem  gemitum  dat  pectore  ab  imo,         485 

Ut  spolia,  ut  currus,  utque  ipsum  corpus  amici, 

Tendentemque  manus  Priamum  conspexit  inermes. 

Se  quoque  principibus  permixtum  agnovit  Achivis, 

Eoasque  acies  et  nigri  Memnonis  arma. 

Ducit  Amazonidum  lunatis  agmina  peltis  490 

Penthesilea  furens,  mediisque  in  millibus  ardet, 

Aurea  subnectens  exsertae  cingula  mammae, 

Bellatrix,  audetque  viris  concurrere  virgo. 

Haec  dum  Dardanio  Aeneae  mirancla  videntur, 
Dum  stupet  obtutuque  haeret  defixus  in  uno  ;  495 

Regina  ad  templum,  forma  pulcherrima  Dido, 
Incessit,  magna  juvenum  stipante  caterva.  -.-^ 


18  AENEIDOS    LIB.    I. 

Qualis  iu  Eurotae  ripis  aut  per  juga  Cynthi 

Exercet  Diana  clioros^  quam  mille  secutae 

Hinc  atque  hiDC  glomerantur  Oreades-illa  pharetram    500 

Fert  bumero,  gradiensque  deas  supereminet  omnes  ; 

Latonae  tacitum  pertentant  gaudia  pectus-; 

Talis  erat  Dido,  talem  se  lacta  ferebat 

Per  medios,  instans  operi  regnisq^ue  futuris. 

Tum  foribus  divae,  media  testudine  templi,  505 

Septa  armis,  solioque  alte  scibnixa,  resedit.. 

Jura  dabat  legesque  viris,  operumque  laborem 

Partibus  aequabat  justis  aut  sorte  trabebat : 

Qaum  subito  Aeneas  concursu  accedere  magno 

Anthea  Sergestumque  videt  fortemque  Cloanthum       510 

Teucrorumque  alios,  ater  quos  aequore  turbo 

Dispulerat  penitusque  ahas  avexerat  oras. 

Obstupuit  simul  ipse,  simul  percussus  Achates 

Laetitiaque  metuq[ue  :  avidi  conjungere  dextras 

Ardebant;  sed  res  animos  incognita  turbat.  515 

Dissimulant,  et  nube  cava  speculantur  amicti, 

Quae  fortuna  viris,  classem  quo  litore  linquant, 

Quid  veniant  cuncti :  nam  lecti  navibus  ibant, 

Orantes  veniam,  et  templum  clamore  petebant. 

Postquam  introgressi  et  coram  data  copia  fandi ;  520 

Maximus  Ilioneus  placido  sic  pectore  coepit  :   >^ 

'*  0  regina,  novam  cui  condere  Jupiter  urbem 

"  Justitiaque  dedit  gentes  frenare  superbas, 

^'  Troes  te  miseri,  ventis  maria  omnia  vecti, 

"  Oramus  :  prohibe  inflmdos  a  navibus  ignes,  525 

"  Parce  pio  generi  et  proj^ius  res  adspice  nostras. 

"  Non  nos  aut  ferro  Libycos  populare  Penates 

"  Venimus,  aut  raptas  ad  litora  vertere  praedas  : 

"  Non  ea  vis  animo,  nec  tanta  supcrbia  victis. 

"  Est  locus,  Hesperiam  Graii  cognomine  dicunt,  530 

"  Terra  antiqua,  potcns  armis  atque  ubere  glebae- 


AENEIDOS    LIC.    I.  19 

"  Oenotri  coluere  viri ;  nunc  fama,  minores 

"  Italiam  dixisse  ducis  de  nomine  gentem-: 

"  Hic  cursus  fuit, 

"  Quum  subito  assurgens  fluctu  nimbosus  Orion  535 

'•  In  vada  caeca  tulit,  penitusque  procacibus  Austris 

'•  Perq^ue  undas,  superante  salo,  perque  invia  saxa 

"  Dispulit :  liuc  pauci  vestris  annavimus  oris.        [morem 

"  Quod  genus  hoc  liominum  ?  quaeve  hunc  tam  barbara 

"  Permittit  patria  ?  Hospitio  proliibemur  arenae ;         540 

"  Bella  cient,  primaque  vetant  consistere  terra  ! 

"  Si  genus  humanum  et  mortalia  temnitis  arma,        * 

"  At  sperate  deos  memores  fandi  atque  nefandi.^ 

"  Eex  erat  Aeneas  nobis,  quo  justior  alter, 

"  Nec  pietate  fuit  nec  bello  major  et  armis  :  545 

"  Quem  si  fata  virum  servant,  si  vescitur  aura 

"  Aetheria  neque  adhuc  cradelibus  occubat  umbris  ; 

"  Non  metus,  officio  nec  te  certasse  -priorem 

"  Poeniteat.     Sunt  et  Siculis  regionibus  urbes 

"  Arvaq^ue,  Trojanoque  a  sanguine  clarus  Acestes.        550 

"  Quassatam  ventis  liceat  subducere  classem, 

"  Et  silvis  aptare  trabes  et  stringere  remos : 

"  Si  datur  Italiam  sociis  et  rege  recepto 

"  Tendere,  ut  Italiam  laeti  Latiumque  petamus  ; 

"  Sin  absumta  sakis,  et  te,  pater  optime  Teucrum,      555 

"  Pontus  habet  Libyae,  nec  spes  jam  restat  luli, 

"  At  freta  Sicaniae  saltem  sedesque  paratas, 

"  Unde  huc  advecti,  regemque  petamus  Acesten." 

TaUbus  Ilioneus  ;  cuncti  simul  ore  fremebant 

Dardanidae.  560 

Tum  breviter  Dido,  vultum  demissa,  profatur : . 

"  Solvite  corde  metum,  Teucri,  secludite  curas. 

"  Kes  dura  et  regni  novitas  me  talia  cogunt 

"  Moliri  et  late  fines  custode  tueri. 

"  Quis  genus  Aeneadum,  quis  Trojae  nesciat  urbem     565 


20  AENEIDOS   LIB.    I. 

"  Virtutesque  virosque  aut  tanti  incendia  belli  ? 

*'  Non  obtusa  adeo  gestamus  pectora  Poeni, 

"  Nec  tam  aversus  equos  Tyria  Sol  jungit  ab  urbe. 

"  Seu  vos  Hesperiam  magnam  Saturniaque  arva, 

"  Sive  Erycis  fines  regemque  optatis  Acesten,  570 

"  Auxilio  tutos  dimittam  opibusque  juvabo. 

"  Vultis  et  his  mecum  pariter  considere  regnis  : 

"  Urbem  quam  statuo,  vestra  est :  subducite  naves  ; 

"  Tros  Tyriusque  mihi  nullo  discrimine  agetur. 

"  Atque  utinam  rex  ipse  Noto  compulsus  eodem  575 

"  Afforet^Aeneas  !  Equidem  per  litora  certos 

"  Dimittam  et  Libyae  lustrare  extrema  jubebo, 

"  Si  quibus  ejectus  silvis  aut  urbibus  errat." 

His  animum  arrecti  dictis,  et  fortis  Achates 

Et  pater  Aeneas  jamdudum  erumpere  nubem  580 

Ardebant.     Prior  Aenean  compellat  Achates : 

"  Nate  dea,  quae  nunc  animo  sententia  surgit  ? 

"  Omnia  tuta  vides,  classem  sociosque  receptos  ; 

"  Unus  abest,  medio  in  fluctu  quem  vidimus  ipsi 

"  Submersum  ;  dictis  respondent  cetera  matris."  585 

Vix  ea  fatus  erat,  quum  circumfusa  repente 

Scindit  se  nubes  et  in  aethera  purgat  apertum. 

Kestitit  Aeneas,  claraque  in  luce  refulsit, 

Os  humerosquQ  deo  similis  :  namque  ipsa  decoram 

Caesariem  nato  genetrix  lumenque  juventae  590 

Purpureum  et  laetos  oculis  afflarat  honores, 

Quale  manus  addunt  ebori  decus,  aut  ubi  flavo 

Argentum  Pariusve  lapis  circumdatur  auro. 

Tum  sic  regiuam  alloquitur,  cunctisque  repente 

Improvisus  ait :  '^Coram,  quem  quaeritis,  adsum,       595 

"  Troius  Aeneas,  Libycis  ereptus  ab  undis.  • 

*'  0  sola  infandos  Trojae  miserata  labores, 

'*  Quae  nos,  reliquias  Danaum,  terraeque  marisque 

"  Omnibus  exhaustos  jam  casibus,  omnium  cgenos, 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    I,  21 

"  Urbe,  domo,  socias  :  grates  persolvere  dignas  600 

"  Non  opis  est  nostrae,  Dido,  nec  quidquid  ubique  est 

"  Gentis  Dardaniae,  magnum  quae  sparsa  per  orbem. 

"  Di  tibi,  si  qua  pios  respectant  numina,  si  quid 

*'  Usquam  justitia  est  et  mens  sibi  ccnscia  recti, 

"  Praemia  digna  ferant.     Quae  te  tam  laeta  tulerunt  605 

"  Saecula  ?  qui  tanti  talem  genuere  parentes  ? 

"  In  freta  dum  fluvii  current,  dum  montibus  umbrae 

"  Lustrabunt  convexa,  polus  dum  sidera  pascet  ; 

"  Semper  honos  nomenque  tuum  laudesque  manebunt, 

"  Quae  me  cumque  vocant  terrae."iSic  fatus,  amicum  610 

Ilionea  petit  dextra,  laevaque  Serestum, 

Post  alios,  fortemque  Gyan,  fortemque  Cloantlium. 

Obstupuit  primo  adspectu  Sidonia  Dido, 

Casu  deinde  viri  tanto,  et  sic  ore  locuta  est : 

"  Quis  te,  nate  dea,  per  tanta  pericula  casus  615 

"  Insequitur  ?  quae  vis  immanibus  applicat  oris  ?  y- 

"  Tune  ille  Aeneas,  quem  Dardanio  Anchisae 

"  Alma  Venus  Phrygii  genuit  Simoentis  ad  undam.?  v 

"  Atque  equidem  Teucrum  memini  Sidona  vcnire 

"  Finibus  expulsum  patriis,  nova  regna  petentem         620 

"  Auxilio  Beli ;  genitor  tum  Belus  opimam 

"  Vastabat  Cyprum,  et  victor  dicione  tenebat. 

"  Tempore  jam  ex  iUo  casus  mihi  cognitus  urbis 

"  Trojanae,  nomenque  tuum,  regesque  Pelasgi. 

"  Ipse  hostis  Teucros  insigni  laude  ferebat,  625 

"  Seque  ortum  antiqua  Teucrorum  ab  stirpe  volebat. 

*'  Quare  agite,  o  tectis  juvenes  succedite  nostris. 

"  Me  quoque  per  multos  similis  fortuna  labores 

"  Jactatam  hac  demum  vokiit  consistere  terra  ; 

"  Non  ignara  maH  miseris  succurrere  disco."  630 

Sic  memorat,  simul  Aenean  in  regia  ducit 

Tecta,  simul  divtim  templis  indicit  honorem. 

Neo  minus  interea  sociis  ad  Htora  mittit 


22  AENEIDOS   LIB.    I. 

Viginti  tauros,  magnorum  horrentia  centum 

Terga  suum,  pingues  ccntum  cum  matribus  agnos,      635 

Muncra  laetitiamque  dii.    ~ 

At  domus  interior  regali  splendida  luxu 

Instruitur,  mediisque  parant  con\Tvia  tectis  : 

Arte  laboratae  vestes  ostroque  superbo, 

Ingens  argcntum  mensis,  caelataque  in  auro  640 

Fortia  facta  patrum,  series  longissima  rerum 

Per  tot  ducta  viros  antiqiiae  ab  origine  gentis. 

Aeneas-neque  enim  patrius  consretere  mentem 

Passus  amor-rapidum  ad  naves  praemittit  Acliaten, 

Ascanio  ferat  baec,  ipsumque  ad  moenia  ducat :  645 

Omnis  in  Ascanio  cari  stat  cura  i^arentis. 

Munera  praeterea  Iliacis  erepta  niinis  i 

Ferre  jubet,  pallam  signis  auroque  rigentem, 

Et  circumtextum  croceo  velamen  acantho, 

Ornatus  Argivae  Helenae,  quos  illa  Mycenis,  650 

Pergama  quum  peteret  inconcessosque  Hymenaeos, 

Extuleratj  matris  Ledae  mirabile  donum ; 

Praeterea  sceptrum,  Ilione  quod  gesserat  olim, 

Maxima  natarum  Priami,  coUoque  monile 

Bac^atum,  et  duplicem  gemmis  auroque  coronam,         655 

Haec  celerans  itcr  ad  naves  tendebat  Achates. 

At  Cytherca  novas  artes,  nova  pectore  versat 
Consiha,  ut  faciem  mutatus  et  ora  Cupido 
Pro  dulci  Ascanio  veuiat,  donisque  furentem 
Incendat  reginam  atque  ossibus  implicet  ignem :  660 

Quippe  domum  timet  ambiguam  Tyriosque  bilingues. 
Urit  atrox  Juno,  et  sub  noctem  cura  recursat. 
Ergo  his  aligerum  dictis  affatur  Amorem  : 
"  Nate,  meae  vires,  mea  magna  potentia,  solus, 
*•'  Nate,  patris  summi  qui  tela  Typhoia  temnis,  665 

"  Ad  te  confagio  et  supplcx  tua  numina  posco.  , 
"  Fratcr  ut  Aeneas  pelago  tuus  omnia  circum 


AENEIDOS    LIB,    I.  23 

"  Litora  jactetur  odiis  Junonis  iniquae, 

"  Kota  tibi,  et  nostro  doluisti  saepe  dolore.  y-> 

"  Hunc  Plioenissa  tenet  Dido  blandisque  moratur         670 

"  Yocibus,  et  vereor,  quo  se  Junonia  vertant 

"  Hospitia :  liaud  tanto  cessabit  cardine  rerum. 

"  Quocirca  capere  ante  dolis  et  cingere  flamma 

"  Keginam  meditor,  ne  quo  se  numine  mutet, 

"  Sed  magno  Aeneae  mecum  teneatur  amore.  G75 

*'  Qua  facere  id  possis,  nostram  nunc  accipe  mentem  : 

"  Eegius  accitu  cari  genitoris  ad  urbem 

"  Sidoniam  puer  ire  parat,  mea  maxima  cura, 

"  Dona  ferens  pelago  et  flammis  restantia  Trojae  : 

"  Hunc  ego  sopitum  somno  super  alta  Cy.thera  680 

"  Aut  super  Idalium  sacrata  sede  recondam, 

"  Ne  qua  scire  dolos  mediusve  occurrere  possit ; 

"  Tu  faciem  illius  noctem  non  amplius  unam 

"  Falle  dolo,  et  notos  pueri  puer  indue  vultus, 

"  Ut,  quum  te  gremio  accipiet  laetissima  Dido  685 

"  Regales  inter  mensas  laticemque  Lyaeum, 

"  Quum  dabit  amplexus  atque  oscula  dulcia  figet, 

"  Occultum  inspires  ignem  fallasque  veneno." 

Paret  Amor  dictis  carae  genetricis,  et  alas 

Exuit,  et  gressu  gaudens  incedit  luli.  690 

At  Venus  Ascanio  placidam  per  membra  quietem 

Irrigat,  et  fotum  gremio  dea  toUit  in  altos 

Idaliae  lucos,  ubi  mollis  amaraciis  illum 

Ploribus  et  dulci  adspirans  complectitur  umbra. 

Jamque  ibat,  dicto  parens,  et  dona  Cupido  695 

Eegia  portabat  Tyriis,  duce  laetns  Achate. 

Quum  venit,  aulaeis  jam  se  regina  superbis 

Aurea  composuit  sponda  mediamque  locavit ; 

Jam  pater  Aeneas  et  jam  Trojana  ju,ventus 

Convenmnt,  stratoque  super  discumbitur-ostro.  700 

Dant  manibus  famuli  lymphas,  Cerercmque  canistris 


24  AENEIDOS   LIB.    I. 

Expediunt,  tonsisque  ferunt  mantelia  villis. 

Quinquaginta  intus  famulae,  quibus  ordine  longo 

Cura  penum  struere  et  flammis  adolere  Penates  ; 

Centum  aliae  totidemque  pares  aetate  ministri,  705 

Qui  dapibus  mensas  onerent  et  pocula  ponant. 

Nec  non  et  Tyrii  per  limina  laeta  frequentes 

Convenere,  toris  jussi  discumbcre  pictis. 

Mirantur  dona  Aeneae,  mirantur  lulum, 

Flagrantesque  dei  vultus  simulataque  verba  710 

Pallamque  et  pictum  croceo  velamen  acantlio.    -/ 

Praecipue  infelix,  pesti  devota  futurae, 

Expleri  mentem  nequit  ardescitque  tuendo 

Phoenissa,  et  pariter  puero  donisque  movetur. 

Ille  ubi  complexu  Aeneae  coUoque  pependit,  715 

Et  magnum  falsi  implevit  genitoris  amorem  '^ 

Keginam  petit.     Haec  oculis,  baec  pectore  toto 

Haeret  et  interdum  gremio  fovet,  inscia  Dido, 

Insideat  quantus  miserae  deus.     At  memor  ille 

Matris  Acidaliae,  paullatim  abolere  Sych.aeum  720 

Incipit,  et  vivo  tentat  praevertere  amore 

Jam  pridem  resides  animos  desuetaque  cordar 

Postquam  prima  quies  epulis  mensaeque  remotae ; 

Crateras  magnos  statuunt  et  vina  coronant. 

Fit  strepitus  tectis,  vocemque  per  ampla  volutant        725 

Atria  ;  dependent  lychni  laquearibus  aureis 

Incensi,  et  noctem  flammis  funalia  vincunt. 

Hic  regina  gravem  gemmis  auroque  poposcit 

Implevitque  mero  pateram,  quam  Belus  et  omnes 

A  Belo  soliti ;  tum  facta  silentia  tectis  :  730 

"  Jupiter-hospitibus  nam  te  dare  jura  loquuntur-, 

"  Hunc  laetum  Tyriisque  diem  Trojaque  profectis 

"  Esse  velis,  nostrosque  hujus  meminisso  minores!   " 

"  Adsit  laetitiae  Bacchus  dator,  et  bona  Juno! 

"  Et  vos,  0,  coetum,  Tyrii,  celebratc  favcntcs!"  735 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    I.  25 

Dixit,  et  in  mensam  laticum  libavit  honorem, 
Primaque,  libato,  sumnio  tenus  attigit  ore, 
Tum  Bitiae  dedit  incrcpitans  ;  ille  impiger  liausit 
Spumantem  pateram,  et  pleno  se  proluit  auro ; 
Post  alii  proceres.     Cithara  crinitus  lopas  740 

Personat  aurata,  docuit  quem  maximus  Atlas. 
Hic  canit  errantem  lunam  solisque  labores, 
Unde  bominum  genus  et  pecudes,  unde  imber  et  ignes, 
Arcturum  pluviasque  Hyadas  geminosque  Triones, 
Quid  tantum  oceano  properent  se  tinguere  soles  745 

Hiberni,  vel  quae  tardis  mora  noctibus  obstet. 
Ingeminant  plausu  Tyrii,  Troesque  sequuntur. 
Nec  non  et  vario  noctem  sermone  trahebat 
Infelix  Dido,  longumque  bibebat  amorem, 
Multa  super  Priamo  rogitans,  super  Hectore  multa  ;    750 
Nunc,  quibus  Aurorae  venisset  filius  armis, 
Nunc,  quales  Diomedis  equi,  nunc,  quantus  AchiUes. 
"  Imo  age  et  a  prima  dic,  bospes,  origine  nobis 
"  Insidias  "  inquit  "  Danaiim,  casusque  tuorum, 
"  Erroresque  tuos  :  nam  te  jam  septima  portat  755 

*^  Omnibus  errantem  terria  et  fluctibus  aestas." 
2 


P.  VIRGILII   MAROKIS 

AENEIDOS 

LIBER  SECUNDUS. 


Couticuere  omnes,  intentiqiie  ora  tenebant. 

Igade  toro  pater  Aeneas  sic  orsus  ab  alto  : 

"  Infandum,  regina,  jubes  renovare  dolorem, 

Trojanas  ut  opes  et  lamentabile  regnum 

Eruerint  Danai ;  quaeque  ipse  miserrima  vidi,  5 

Et  quorum  pars  magna  fui.     Quis  talia  fando 

Myrmidonum  Dolopumve  aut  duri  miles  Ulixi 

Temperet  a  lacrimis  ?  et  jam  nox  bumida  coelo 

Praecipitat,  suadentque  cadentia  sidera  somnos. 

Sed  si  tantus  amor  casus  cognoscere  nostros  10 

Et  breviter  Trojae  supremum  audire  laborem  ; 

Quamquam  animus  meminisse  horret  luctuque  rcfugit, 

Incipiam.     Fracti  bello  fatisque  repulsi 

Ductores  Danaum,  tot  jam  labentibus  annis, 

Instar  montis  equum  divina  Palladis  arte  15 

Aedificant,  sectaque  intexunt  abiete  costas  ; 

Votum  pro  reditu  simulant :  ea  fama  vagatur. 

Huc  delccta  virum  sortiti  corpora  furtim 

Includunt  cacco  lateri,  penitusque  cavernas 

Ingentes  uterumque  armato  milite  complent.  20 

Est  in  conspectu  Tenedos,  notissima  fama 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    II.  27 

Insula,  dives  oj^um,  Priami  dum  regna  manebant, 

Nunc  tantum  sinus  et  statio  male  fida  carinis  : 

Huc  se  provecti  deserto  in  litore  condunt. 

Nos  abiisse  rati  et  vento  petiisse  Mycenas.  25 

Ergo  omnis  longo  sojvit  se  Teucria  luctu ; 

Panduntur  portae  :  juvat  ire  et  Dorica  castra 
L  Desertosque  videre  locos  litusque  relictum. 

Hic  Dolopum  manus,  hic  saevus  tendebat  Acliilles  ; 

Classibus  hic  locus,  hic  acie  certare  solebant.  30 

Pars  stupet  innuptae  donum  exitiale  Minervae, 

Et  molem  mirantur  equi. '    Primusque  Thj^moetes 

Duci  intra  muros  hortatur  et  arce  locari, 

Sive  dolo,  seu  jam  Trojae  sic  fata  ferebant. 

At  Capys,  et  quorum  melior  sententia  menti,  35 

Aut  pelago  Danafim  insidias  suspectaque  dona 

Praecipitare  jubent  subjectisque  urere  flammis, 
Aut  terebrare  cavas  uteri  et  tentare  latebras. 

Scinditur  incertum  studia  in  contraria  vuli>;us.  - 

Primus  ibi  ante  omnes,  magna  comitante  caterva,  40 

Laocoon  ardens  summa  decurrit  ab  arce, 

Et  procul :  "  0  miseri,  quae  tanta  insania,  cives  ? 

"  Creditis  avectos  hostes,  aut  ulla  putatis 

*'  Dona  carere  doHs  Danaum  ?  sic  notus  Ulixes  ? 

"  Aut  hoc  inclusi  ligno  occultantur  Achivi,  45 

"  Aut  haec  in  nostros  fabricata  est  machina  muros, 

"  Inspectura  domos  venturaque  desuper  urbi, 

"  Aut  ahquis  latet  error.     Equo  ne  credite,  Teucri. 

"  Quidquid  id  est,  timeo  Danaos  et  dona  ferentes."  • 

Sic  fatus,  validis  ingentem  viribus  hastam  50 

In  latus  inque  feri  curvam  comj)agibus  alvum 

Gontorsit.     Stetit  illa  tremens,  uteroque  recusso 

Insonuere  cavae  gemitumque  dedere  cavernae  ; 

Et,  si  fata  deum,  si  mens  non  laeva  fuisset, 

Impulerat  ferro  Argolicas  foedare  latebras,  55 


28  AENEIDOS    LIB.    II. 

Trojaque  nunc  stares  Priamique  arx  alta  maneres  ! 

Eccc,  manus  juvcncm  interca  post  terga  revinctum 
Pastorcs  magno  ad  regom  clamore  traliebant 
Dardanidae,  qui  se  ignotum  venientibus  ultro, 
Hoc  ipsum  ut  strueret  Trojamque  aperiret  Achivis,        GO 
Obtulerat,  fidens  animi  atque  in  utrumque  paratus, 
Seu  versare  dolos  seu  certae  occumbere  morti. 
Undique  visendi  studio  Trojana  juventus 
Circumfusa  ruit,  certantque  illudere  capto. 
Accipe  nunc  Danaum  insidias,  et  crimine  ab  uno  65 

Disce  omnes. 

Namquc  ut  conspectu  in  medio  turbatus,  inermis, 
Constitit  atque  oculis  Phrygia  agmina  circumspexit ; 
"  Heu,  quac  nunc  tellus  "  inquit,  "  quae  me  aequora  possunt 
"  Accipere,  aut  quid  jam  misero  mihi  denique  restat,    70 
"  Cui  neque  apud  Danaos  usquam  locus,  et  super  ipsi 
"  Dardanidae  infensi  poenas  cum  sanguine  poscunt  ?  " 
Quo  gemitu  conversi  animi,  compressus  et  omuis 
Impetus.     Hortamur  fari,  quo  sanguine  cretus, 
Quidve  ferat ;  memoret,  quae  sit  fiducia  capto.  75 

nie  haec,  deposita  tandem  formidine,  fatur : 
Cuncta  equidem  tibi,  rex,  fuerit  quodcumque,  fatebor 
Vera"  inquit,  "neque  me  Argolica  de  gente  negabo: 
Hoc  primum  ;  nec,  si  miserum  Fortuna  Sinonem 
'  Finxit,  vanum  etiam  mendacemque  improba  finget.    80 
'  Fando  aliquod  si  forte  tuas  pervenit  ad  aures 
'  Belidae  nomen  Palamedis  et  inclyta  faraa 
'  Gloria,  quem  falsa  sub  proditione  Pelasgi 
'  Iiisontem  infando  indicio,  quia  bella  vetabat, 
'  Demisere  neci,  nunc  cassum  lumine  lugent .  ^5 

'  IUi  me  coinitemet  consangilinitate  propinquum 
'  Pauper  in  arma  pater  primis  huc  niisit  ab  annis. 
'  Dum  stabat  regno  incolumis  regumque  vigcbat 
'  Conciliis  ;  et  nos  aliquod  nomcnque  decusque 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    II.  29 

^'  Gessimus.     Invidia  postquam  pellacis  Ulixi-  90 

"  Haud  ignota  loquor-superis  concessit  ab  oris  ; 

"  Afflictus  vitam  in  tenebris  luctuque  trahebam, 

"  Et  casum  insontig  mecum  indignabar  amici. 

"  Nec  tacui  demens,  et  me,  fors  si  qua  tulisset, 

"  Si  patrios  umquam  remeassem  victor  ad  Argos,  95 

"  Promisi  ultorem,  et  verbis  odia  aspera  movi. 

"  Hinc  mihi  prima  mali  labes  ;  hinc  semper  Ulixeg 

"  Criminibus  terrere  novis,  hinc  spargere  voces 

"  In  vulgum  ambiguas,  et  quaerere  conscius  arma. 

"  Nec  requievit  enim,  donec  Calchante  ministro...         100 

"  Sed  quid  ego  haec  autem  nequidquam  ingrata  revolvo  ? 

"  Quidve  moror,  si  omnes  uno  ordine  habetis  Achivos, 

"  Idque  audire  sat  est  ?  Jamdudum  sumite  poenas  : 

"  Hoc  Ithacus  velit,  et  magno  mercentur  Atridae." 

Tum  vero  ardemus  scitari  et  quaerere  causas,  105 

Ignari  scelerum  tantorum  artisque  Pelasgae. 

Prosequitur  pavitans,  et  ficto  pectore  fatur  : 

"  Saepe  fugam  Danai  Troja  cupiere  relicta 

"  Moliri  et  longo  fessi  discedere  bello ; 

"  Fecissentque  utinam  !  Saepe  illos  aspera  ponti  110 

"  Interclusit  hiems,  et  terruit  Auster  euntes  ; 

"  Praecipue,  quum  jam  hic  trabibus  contextus  acernis 

"  Staret  cquus,  toto  sonuerunt  aethere  nimbi. 

"  Suspensi  Eurypylum  scitantem  oracula  Phoebi 

"  Mittimus;  isque  adytis  haec  tristia  dicta  reportat :  135 

"  '  Sanguine  placastis  ventos  et  virgine  caesa,. 

"  '  Quum  primum  Iliacas  Danai  venistis  ad  oras : 

"  '  Sanguine  quaerendi  reditus,  animaque  litandum 

"  '  Argolica.'     Vulgi  quae  vox  ut  venit  ad  aures ; 

"  Obstupuere  animi,  gelidusque  per  ima  cucurrit  120 

"  Ossa  tremor,  cui  fata  parent,  quem  poscat  ApoUo. 

"  Hic  Ithacus  vatem  magno  Calchanta  tumultu 

"  Protrahit  in  medios ;  quae  sint  ea  numina  divum, 


30  AENEIDOS   LIB.    II. 

"  Fla"-itat :  et  mihi  iam  miilti  crudelc  canebant 

"  Artificis  scelus,  ct  taciti  vcntura  videbant.  125 

"  Bis  quinos  silet  iile  dies,  tectusque  recusat 

"  Prodcrc  vocc  sua  quemquam  aut  opponere  morti; 

"  Vix  tandem  magnis  Itliaci  clamoribus  actus, 

"  Corcposito  rumpit  vocem  et  me  destinat  arae. 

"  Assensere  omnes,  et,  quae  sibi  quisque  timebat,  130 

"  Unius  in  miseri  exitium  convcrsa  tulere. 

"  Jamque  dies  infanda  adcrat :  mihi  sacra  parari, 

"  Et  salsae  fruges,  et  circum  tcmpora  vittae. 

"  Eripui-fateor-leto  me  et  vincula  rujii, 

"  Limosoque  lacu  per  noctem  obscurus  in  ulva  135 

*'  Delitui,  dum  vela,  darent  si  forte,  dedissent. 

"  Nec  mihi  jam  patriam  antiquam  spes  ulla  videndi, 

"  Nec  dulces  natos  exoptatumque  parentem ; 

"  Quos  illi  fors  et  poenas  ob  nostra  reposcent 

"  Effiigia,  et  culpam  hanc  miserorum  morte  piabunt.  140 

"  Quod  te  per  supcros  et  conscia  numina  veri, 

"  Per,  si  qua  est,  quae  restet  adhuc  mortalibus  usquam, 

"  Intemerata  fidcs,  oro,  misercre  laboram 

"  Tantorum  ;  miserere  animi  non  digna  ferentis." 

His  lacrimis  vitam  damus,  et  miserescimus  ultro.  145 

Ipse  viro  primus  manicas  atque  arta  levari 

Vincla  jubet  Priamus,  dictisque  ita  fatur  amicis  : 

*'  Quisquis  es,  amissos  hinc  jam  obhviscere  Graios : 

"  Nostcr  eris;  mihique  haec  cdissere  vera  roganti;         149 

"  Quo  molem  hanc  immanis  equi  statuere  ?  quis  auctor  ? 

"  Quidve  petunt  ?  quae  religio,  aut  quae  machina  belli  ?" 

Dixerat.     Ille,  dolis  instructus  et  arte  Pelasga, 

SustuUt  exutas  vinclis  ad  sidera  palmas ; 

"  Vos,  aeterni  ignes,  et  non  violabile  vestrum 

"  Testor  numen"  ait,  "  vos,  arae  ensesque  ncfandi,       155 

"  Quos  fugi,  vittaeque  deum,  quas  hostia  gessi : 

''  Fas  mihi  Graioruni  sacrata  rcsolvcro  jura, 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    II,  31 

"  Fas  odisse  viros  atque  omnia  ferre  sub  auras, 

"  Si  qua  tegunt,  teneor  patriae  nec  legibus  uUis 

"  Tu  modo  promissis  maneas,  servataque  serves,  16 

"  Troja,  fidem,  si  vera  feram,  si  magna  rependam.-- 

"  Omnis  spes  Danaiim  et  coepti  fiducia  belli 

"  Palladis  auxiliis  semper  stetit.     Impius  ex  q^uo 

"  Tydides  sed  enim  scelerumque  inventor  Ulixes, 

"Fatale  aggressi  sacrato  avellere  templo  165 

"  Palladium,  caesis  summae  custodibus  arcis, 

"  Corrl^Liere  sacram  effigiem,  manibusque  cruentis 

"  Virgineas  ausi  divae  contingere  vittas  ; 

"  Ex  illo  fluere  ac  retro  sublapsa  referri 

"  Spes  Danaum,  fractae  vires,  aversa  deae  mens.  170 

"  Nec  dubiis  ea  signa  dedit  Tritonia  monstris  : 

"  Vix  positum  castris  simulacrum  ;  arsere  coruscae 

"  Luminibus  flammae  arrectis,  salsusque  per  artus 

"  Sudor  iit,  terque  ipsa  solo-mirabile  dictu- 

"  Emicuit,  parmamque  ferens  bastamque  trementem.  175 

"  Extemplo  tentanda  fuga  canit  aequora  Calchas, 

"  Nec  posse  Argolicis  exscindi  Pergama  telis, 

"  Omina  ni  repetant  Argis,  numenque  reducant, 

"  Quod  pelago  et  curvis  secum  avexere  carinis. 

"  Et  nunc  quod  patrias  vento  petiere  Mycenas :  180 

"  Arma  deosque  parant  comites,  pelagoque  remenso 

"  Improvisi  aderunt.     Ita  digerit  omina  Calclias. 

"'  Hanc  pro  Palladio,  moniti,  pro  numine  laeso 

"  Effigiem  statuere,  nefas  quae  triste  piaret. 

"  Hanc  tamen  immensam  Calchas  attoUere  molem       185 

"  Eoboribus  textis  coeloque  educere  jussit, 

"  Ne  recipi  portis  aut  duci  in  moenia  possit, 

"  Neu  populum  antiqua  sub  religione  tueri. 

"  Nam  si  vestra  manus  violasset  dona  Minervae  ; 

"  Tum  magnum  exitium-quod  di  prius  omenin  ipsum  190 

•'  Convertant !-  Pciami  imperio  Phrygibusque  futurum  : 


32  AENEIDOS    LIB.    II. 

"  SiD  manibus  vestris  vestram  adscendisset  in  urbem  ; 
"  Ultro  Asiam  magno  Pclopea  ad  moenia  bcUo 
"  Vcnturam,  ct  nostros  ca  fata  mancre  nepotes." 
Talibiis  insidiis  perjurique  arte  Sinonis  195 

Credita  rcs,  captique  dolis  lacrimisque  coactis. 
Quos  nequc  Tydidcs,  nec  Larissaeus  Achilles, 
Non  anni  domucrc  deccm,  non  millc  carinae. 

Hic  aliud  majus  miseris  multoque  tremendum 
Objicitur  magis,  atque  improvida  pcctora  turbat.  200 

Laocoon,  ductus  Ncptuno  sorte  saccrdos, 
Solemnes  taurum  ingentem  mactabat  ad  aras. 
Ecce  autem  gemini  a  Tenedo  tranquilla  per  alta- 
Horrcsco  refercns-immensis  orbibus  angues 
Incumbunt  pelago,  pariterqu»  ad  litora  tendunt :  205 

Pectora  quorum  inter  fluctus  arrecta  jubaeque 
Sanguineae  superant  undas,  pars  cetcra  pontum 
Pone  legit  sinuatque  immcnsa  volumiue  terga. 
Fit  sonitus  spumante  salo.     Jamque  arva  tenebant, 
Ardentesque  oculos  suffecti  sanguine  et  igni,  210 

Sibila  lambcbant  linguis  vibrantibus  ora. 
Diffugimus  visu  exsangucs.     Illi  agmine  certo 
Laocoonta  petunt,  et  primum  parva  duorum 
Corpora  natorum  scrpcns  amplexus  utcrquc 
Implicat,  et  miseros  morsu  depascitur  artus ;  215 

Post  ipsum  auxilio  subeuntcm  ac  tela  fcrentem 
Corripiunt,  spirisquc  ligant  ingontibus,  et  jam 
I3is  mcdium  amjilexi,  bis  collo  squamca  circum 
Tcrga  dati,  supcrant  capite  et  ccrvicibus  altis. 
Ille  simul  manibus  tcndit  divellere  nodos,  220 

Perfiisus  sanie  vittas  atroque  veneno, 
Glamorcs  simul  horrendos  ad  sidera  tollit ; 
Quales  mugitus,  fugit  quum  saucius  aram 
Taurus  ct  incertam  cxcussit  cervicc  sccurim. 
At  gemini  lapsu  delubra  ad  sunima  dracipncs  225 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    II.  33 

Effugiunt,  saevaeque  petunt  Tritonidis  arcem, 

Sub  pedibusque  deae  clipeique  sub  orbe  teguntur. 

Tum  vero  tremefacta  novus  per  pectora  cunctis 

Insinuat  pavor;  et  scelus  expendisse  merentem 

Laocoonta  ferunt,  sacrum  qui  cuspide  robur  230 

Laeserit  et  tergo  sceleratam  intorserit  hastam. 

Ducendum  ad  sedes  simulacrum,  orandaque  divae 

Numina  conclamant. 

Dividimus  muros  et  moenia  pandimus  urbis. 

Accingunt  omnes  operi,  pedibusque  rotarum  235 

Subjiciunt  lapsus,  et  stuppea  vincula  collo 

Intendunt.     Scandit  fatalis  macbina  muros, 

Feta  armis ;  pueri  circum  innuptaeque  puellae 

Sacra  canunt,  funemque  manu  contingere  gaudent ; 

Illa  subit^  mediaeque  minans  illabitur  urbi.  240 

0  patria,  o  divum  domus  Ilium,  et  inclyta  bello 

Moenia  Dardanidum  !  quater  ipso  in  limine  portae 

Substitit,  atque  utero  sonitum  quater  arma  dedere ; 

Instamus  tamen  immemores  caecique  furore, 

Et  monstrum  infelix  sacrata  sistimus  arce.  245 

Tunc  etiam  fatis  aperit  Cassandra  futuris 

Ora,  dei  jussu  non  umquam  crcdita  Teucris. 

Nos  delubra  deum  miseri,  quibus  ultimus  esset 

IUe  dies,  festa  velamus  fronde  per  urbem. 

Vertitur  interea  coelum,  et  ruit  oceano  nox,  250 

Involvens  umbra  magna  terramque  polumque 

Myrmidonumque  dolos ;  fusi  per  moenia  Teucri 

Conticuere  :  sopor  fessos  complectitur  artus. 

Et  jam  Argiva  phalanx  iustructis  navibus  ibat 

A  Tenedo,  tacitae  per  amica  silentia  lunae  255 

Litora  nota  petens,  flammas  quum  regia  puppis 

Extulerat,  fatisque  detim  defensus  iniquis 

Inclusos  atero  Danaos  et  pinea  furtim 

Laxat  claustra  Sinon.     Illos  patefactus  ad  auras 
o* 


34  AENEIDOS    LIB.    II. 

Reddit  equus,  laetiqiie  cavo  se  robore  promunt  260 

Thessandrus  Sthenelusc[ue  duces  et  dirus  XJlixes, 
Deraissum  lapsi  pcr  funem,  Acamasque  Thoasque, 
PeMesque  Neoptolemus,  primusque  Machaon, 
Et  Menclaus,  et  ipse  doli  fabricator  Epcos. 
[nvadunt  urbem  somno  vinoque  sepultam  ;  265 

Caeduntur  vigiles,  portisque  patentibus  omnes 
Accipiunt  socios  atque  agmina  conscia  jungunt. 

Tempus  erat,  quo  prima  quies  mortalibus  aegris 
Incipit,  et  dono  divum  gratissima  serpit  : 
In  somnis,  ecce,  ante  oculos  maestissimus  Hector         270 
Visus  adesse  mihi,  largosque  effundere  fletus, 
Raptatus  bigis,  ut  quondam,  aterque  cruento 
Pulvere,  perque  pedes  trajectus  lora  tumentes. 
Hei  mihi,  qualis  erat  !  quantum  mutatus  ab  iUo 
Hectore,  qui  redit  exuvias  indutus  Achilli,  275 

Vel  Danaum  Phrygios  jaculatus  puppibus  ignes  ! 
Squalentem  barbam  et  concretos  sanguinc  crines, 
•  Vulneraque  illa  gerens,  quae  circum  plurima  muros 
Accepit  patrios.     Ultro  flens  ipse  videbar 
Compellare  virum  et  maestas  expromere  voces  :  280 

"  0  lux  Dardaniae,  spcs  o  fidissima  Teucrum, 
"  Quae  tantae  tenuere  morae  ?  quibus  Hector  ab  oris 
"  Exspectate  venis  ?  ut  te  post  multa  tuorum 
"  Funera,  post  varios  hominumque  urbisque  labores 
"  Defessi  adspicimus  ?  quae  caussa  indigna  serenos     285 
"  Foedavit  vultus,  aut  cur  haec  vulnera  cerno  ?" 
Ille  nihil,  nec  me  quaerentem  vana  moratur, 
Sed  graviter  gemitus  imo  de  pectore  ducens, 
"  Heu  fuge,  nate  dea,  teque  his"  ait  "  eripe  flammis. 
"  Hostis  habet  muros ;  ruit  alta  a  cuhnine  Troja.         290 
"  Sat  patriae  Priamoque  datum.     Si  Pergama  dextra 
"  Dcfendi  possent,  etiam  hac  defensa  fuissent. 
"  Sacra  sunsrinc  til)i  (••Mninondat  Troja  Penates : 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    II,  35 

"  Hos  cape  fatorum  comites,  liis  moenia  quaere, 
"  Magna  pererrato  statues  quae  denique  ponto."  295 

Sic  ait,  et  manibus  vittas  Yestamque  potentem 
Aeternumque  adytis  effert  penetralibus  ignem, 

Diverso  interea  miscentur  moenia  luctu, 
Et  magis  atque  magis,  quamquam  secreta  parentis 
Anchisae  domus  arboribusque  obtecta  recessit,  300 

Clarescunt  sonitus,  armorumque  ingruit  liorror, 
Excutior  somno,  et  summi  fastigia  tecti 
Adscensu  supero,  atque  arrectis  auribus  adsto  : 
In  segetem  veluti  quum  flamma  furentibus  Austris 
Incidit,  aut  rapidus  montano  flumine  torrens  305 

Sternit  agros,  sternit  sata  laeta  boumque  labores, 
Praecipitesque  trahit  silvas ;  stupet  inscius  alto 
Accipiens  sonitum  saxi  de  vertice  pastor. 
Tum  vero  manifesta  fides,  Danaumque  patescunt 
Insidiae  :  jam  Deiphobi  dedit  ampla  ruinam  310 

Vulcano  superante  domus,  jam  proximus  ardet 
Ucalegon,  Sigea  igni  freta  lata  relucent ; 
Exoritur  clamorque  virum  clangorque  tubarum. 
Arma  amens  capio  ;  nec  sat  rationis  in  armis, 
Sed  glomerare  manum  bello  et  concurrere  in  arcem      315 
Cum  sociis  ardent  animi :  furor  iraque  mentem 
Praecipitant,  pulchrumque  mori  succurrit  in  armis. 
Ecce  autem  telis  Panthus  elapsus  Achivum, 
Panthus  Othryades,  arcis  Phoebique  sacerdos, 
Sacra  manu  victosque  deos  parvumque  nepotem  320 

Ipse  trahit,  cursuque  amcns  ad  limina  tendit. 
"  Quo  res  summa  loco,  Panthu  .^  quam  prendimus  arcem  ?" 
Vix  ea  fatus  eram,  gemitu  quum  talia  reddit : 
"  Venit  summa  dies  et  ineluctabile  tempus 
"  Dardaniae,     Fuimus  Troes,  fuit  Hium  et  ingens       325 
"  Gloria  Teucrorum :  ferus  omnia  Jupiter  Argos 
''  Transtulit,  incensa  Danai  dominantur  in  urbc. 


36  AENEIDOS    LIB.    U. 

"  Arduus  armatos  mediis  iu  moenibus  adstaus 

"  Fuudit  equus,  victorque  Sinon  inccndia  miscct 

"  Insultans;  portis  alii  bipatcntibus  adsunt,  330 

''  Millia  quot  magnis  umquam  venere  Mycenis  ;  • 

"  Obscdere  alii  tclis  angusta  viarum 

'*  Oppositi ;  stat  ferri  acies  mucrone  corusco 

"  Stricta,  parata  neci ;  vix  j)rimi  jiroelia  tentant 

"  Portarum  vigiles,  et  caeco  Marte  resistunt,"  335 

Talibus  Othrj^adae  dictis  et  numinc  divum 
In  liammas  et  in  arma  fcror,  quo  tristis  Erinys, 
Quo  fremitus  vocat  et  sublatus  ad  aetliera  clamor. 
Addunt  se  socios  Rhipeus  et  maximus  armis 
Epytus,  oblati  per  lunam,  Hypanisque  Dymasque,       340 

.  Et  lateri  agglomerant  nostro,  juvenisque  Coroebus 
Mygdonides-illis  ad  Trojam  forte  diebus 
Venerat,  insano  Cassandrae  incensus  amore, 
Et  gener  auxilium  Priamo  Phrygibusque  ferebat, 
Infelix,  qui  non  sponsae  praecepta  furentis  345 

Audierit-. 

Quos  ubi  confertos  audere  in  j^^roelia  vidi ; 
Incipio  super  his  :  "  Juvenes,  fortissima  frustra 
''  Pectora,  si  vobis  audentem  extrema  cupido 
"  Certa  sequi-quae  sit  rebus  fortuna,  videtis  :  350 

"  Excessere  omnes  adytis  arisque  relictis 
"  Di,  quibus  imperium  hoc  steterat ;  succurritis  urbi 
"  Incensae-  ;  moriamur  et  in  mcdia  arma  ruamus. 
"  Una  salus  victis  nuUam  sperare  sahitem." 
Sic  animis  juvenum  furor  additus  :  inde,  hipi  ccu        355 
Raptores  atra  in  nebula,  quos  improba  vcntris 
Exegit  caccos  rabics,  catulique  relicti 

JFaucibus  exspectant  siccis,  per  tcla,  per  hostes 
Vadimus  haud  dubiam  in  mortem,  mediaeque  tenemus 
Urbis  itcr.     Nox  alra  cava  circumvolat  umbra.  360 

Quis  cladem  illius  noctis,  quis  funera  fando 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    II.  37 

Explicet,  aut  possit  lacrimis  aequare  labores  ? 
Urb^  antiqua  ruit,  multos  dominata  per  annos  ; 
Plurima  perque  vias  sternuutur  inertia  passim 
Corpora,  perque  domos  et  religiosa  deorum  365 

Limina.     Nec  soli  poenas  dant  sanguine  Teucri ; 
Quondam  etiam  victis  redit  in  praecordia  virtus, 
Victoresque  cadunt  Danai.     Crudelis  ubique 
Luctus,  ubique  pavor  et  plurima  mortis  imago. 

Primus  se  Danaum ,  magna  comitante  caterva,        370 
Androgeos  obfert  nobis,  socia  agmina  credens 
Inscius,  atque  ultro  verbis  compellat  amicis : 
"  Festinate,  viri !  Nam  quae  tam  sera  moratur 
"  Segnities  ?     Alii  rapiunt  incensa  feruntque 
''  Pergama  ;  vos  celsis  nunc  primum  a  navibus  itis  ?  '  375 
Dixit,  et  extemplo-neque  enim  responsa  dabantur 
Fida  satis-sensit  medios  delapsus  in  hostes. 
Obstupuit,  retroque  pedem  cum  voce  repressit. 
Improvisum  aspris  veluti  qui  sentibus  anguem 
Pressit  bumi  nitens,  trepidusque  repente  refugit  380 

Attollentem  iras  et  caerula  colla  tumentem  ; 
Haud  secus  Androgeos  visu  tremefactus  abibat. 
Irruimus  densis  et  circumfundimur  armis, 
Ignarosque  loci  passim  et  formidiue  captos 
Sternimus  :  adspirat  primo  fortuna  labori.  385 

Atque  liic  successu  exsultans  animisque  Coroebus 
"  0  socii,  qua  prima  "  inquit  "  fortuna  salutis 
"  Monstrat  iter,  quaque  ostendit  se  dextra,  sequamur. 
"  Mutemus  clipeos,  Danaumque  insignia  nobis 
"  Aptemus.     Dolus,  an  virtus,  quis  in  hoste  requirat  ?  390 
'  Arma  dabunt  ipsi."     Sic  fatus,  deinde  comantem 
\ndrogei  galeam  clipeique  insigne  decorum 
Induitur,  laterique  Argivum  accommodat  ensem, 
Hoc  Khipeus,  hoc  ipse  Dymas  omnisque  juventus 
Laeta  facit :  spoliis  se  quisque  recentibus  armat.  395 


38  AENEIDOS    LIB.    11. 

Vadimus  immixti  Danais  haud  numine  nostro, 

Multaque  per  caecam  congressi  proelia  noctem 

Conserimus,  multos  Danaum  demittimus  Orco. 

Diffugiunt  alii  ad  naves,  et  litora  cursu 

Fida  petunt ;  pars  ingentem  formidine  turpi  400 

Scandunt  rursus  equum,  et  nota  conduntur  in  alvo. 

Heu  nibil  invitis  fas  quemquam  fidere  divis ! 

Ecce  trahebatur  passis  Priameia  virgo 

Crinibus  a  templo  Cassandra  adytisque  Minervae, 

Ad  coelum  tendens  ardentia  lumina  frustra,  405 

Lumina,  nam  teneras  arcebant  vincula  palmas. 

Non  tulit  hanc  speciem  furiata  mente  Coroebus, 

Et  sese  medium  injecit  periturus  in  agmen : 

Consequimur  cuncti  et  densis  incurrimus  armis. 

Hic  primum  ex  alto  delubri  culmine  telis  410 

Nostrorum  obruimur,  oriturque  miserrima  caedes 

Armorum  facie  et  Graiarum  errore  jubarum. 

Tum  Danai  gemitu  atque  ereptae  virginis  ira 

Undique  collecti  invadunt,  acerrimus  Ajax, 

Et  gemini  Atridae,  Dolopumque  exercitus  omnis :         415 

Adversi  rupto  ceu  quondam  turbine  venti 

Confligunt  Zephyrusque  Notusque  et  laetus  Eois 

Eurus  equis,  stridunt  silvae,  saevitque  tridenti 

Spumeus  atquc  imo  Nereus  ciet  aequora  fundo. 

Illi  etiam,  si  quos  obscura  nocte  per  umbram  420 

Fudimus  insidiis  totaque  agitavimus  urbe, 

Apparcnt,  primi  clipcos  mentitaquc  tela 

Agnoscunt,  atque  ora  sono  discordia  signant. 

Ilicet  obruimur  numero  ;  primusque  Corocbus 

Penelei  dextra  divae  armipotcntis  ad  aram  425 

Procumbit  ;  cadit  ct  Ehipeus,  justissimus  unus 

Qui  fuit  in  Teucris  et  servantissimus  aequi : 

Dis  aliter  visum  ;  percunt  Ilypanisque  Dymasque, 

Confixi  a  sociis,  ncc  tc  lua  phirima,  Panthu, 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    II,  39 

Labentem  pietas  nec  Apollinis  infula  texit.  430 

Iliaci  cineres  et  flamma  extrema  meorum, 

Testor,  in  occasu  vestro  nec  tela  nec  ullas 

Vitavisse  vices  Danaum,  et,  si  fata  fuissent, 

Ut  caderem,  meruisse  manu.     Divellimur  inde : 

Ipliitus  et  Pelias  mecum,  quorum  Iphitus  aevo  435 

Jam  gravior,  Pelias  et  vulnere  tardus  Ulixi ; 

Protinus  ad  sedes  Priami  clamore  vocati. 

Hic  vero  ingentem  pugnam,  ceu  cetera  nusquam 
Bella  forent,  nulli  tota  morerentur  in  urbe, 
Sic  Martem  indomitum  Danaosque  ad  tecta  ruentes     440 
Cernimus,  obsessumque  acta  testudine  limen. 
Haerent  parietibus  scalae,  postesque  sub  ipsos 
Nituntur  gradibus,  clipeosque  a'd  tela  sinistris 
Protecti  objiciunt,  prensant  fastigia  dextris. 
Dardanidae  contra  turres  ac  tecta  domorum  445 

Culmina  convellunt :  his  se,  quando  ultima  cernunt, 
Extrema  jam  in  morte  parant  defendere  telis, 
Auratasque  trabes,  veterum  decora  alta  parentum, 
Devolvunt ;  alii  strictis  mucronibus  imas 
Obsedere  fores  :  bas  servant  agmine  denso.  450 

Instaurati  animi,  regis  succurrere  tectis, 
Auxilioque  levare  viros,  vimque  addere  victis. 
Limen  erat  caecaeque  fores  et  pervius  usus 
Tectorum  inter  se  Priami,  postesque  relicti 
A  tergo,  infelix  qua  se,  dum  regna  manebant,  455 

Saepius  Andromacbe  ferre  incomitata  solebat 
Ad  soceros,  et  avo  puerum  Astyanacta  traliebat. 
Evado  ad  summi  fastigia  culminis,  unde 
Tela  manu  miseri  jactabant  irrita  Teucri. 
Turrim,  in  praecipiti  stantem  summisque  sub  astra      460 
Eductam  tectis,  unde  omnis  Troja  videri 
Et  Danaum  solitae  naves  et  Acbaica  castra, 
Aggressi  ferro  circum,  qua  summa  labantes 


40  AENEIDOS   LIB.    II. 

Juncturas  tabulata  dabant,  convellimus  altis 
Sedibus  iinpulirnusque  :  ca  lapsa  repente  ruinam  465 

Cum  sonitu  trahit  et  Danaum  super  agmina  late 
lucidit.     Ast  alii  subeuntj  nec  saxa  nec  ullum 
Telorum  interea  cessat  genus. 

Vestibubini  ante  ipsum  primoquc  in  limine  Pyrrlms 
Exsultat,  telis  et  luce  coruscus  ahena:  470 

QuaHs  ubi  in  lucem  coluber  mala  gramina  pastus, 
Frigida  sub  terra  tumidum  quem  bruma  tcgebat, 
Nunc  positis  novus  exuviis  nitidusque  juventa, 
Lubrica  convolvit  sublato  pectore  terga, 
Arduus  ad  solem,  et  linguis  micat  ore  trisulcis,  475 

Una  ingens  Perij)has  et  equorum  agitator  Achillis, 
Armiger  Automedon,  una  omnis  Scyria  pubes 
Succedunt  tecto,  et  flammas  ad  culmina  jactant. 
Ipse  inter  primos  correpta  dura  bipenni 
Limina  perrumpit,  postesque  a  cardine  vellit  480 

Aeratos ;  jamque  excisa  trabe  firma  cavavit 
Itobora,  et  ingentem  lato  dedit  ore  fenestram. 
Apparet  domus  intus,  et  atria  longa  patescunt ; 
Apparent  Priami  et  veterum  penetralia  regum, 
Armatosque  vident  stantes  jn  limine  primo.  485 

At  domus  interior  gemitu  miseroquc  tumultu 
Miscetur,  penitusque  cavae  plangoribus  acdcs 
Femineis  ululant,  ferit  aurea  sidera  clamor ; 
Tum  pavidae  tectis  matres  ingentibus  errant, 
Amplexaeque  tenent  postes  atque  oscula  figunt.  490 

Instat  vi  jxitria  Pyrrhus ;  ncc  ckustra  neque  ipsi 
XJustodes  sufferre  valent :  labat  ariete  crebro 
Janua,  et  cmoti  procumbunt  cardine  postes. 
Fit  via  vi :  rumpunt  aditus,  primosque  trucidant 
Immissi  Danai,  et  late  loca  milite  complent.  495 

Non  sic,  aggeribus  ruptis  quum  spumcus  amnis 
Exiit  oppositasque  cvicit  gurgite  molcs, 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    II.  41 

Fertur  in  arva  fureas  cumulo,  camposque  per  omnes 
Cum  stabulis  armenta  traliit.     Yicli  ipse  furentem 
Caede  Neoptolemum  geminosque  in  limine  Atridas  ;    500 
Vidi  Hecubam  centumque  nurus,  Priamumque  per  aras 
Sanguine  foedantem,  quos  ipse  sacraverat,  ignes. 
Quinquaginta  illi  thalami,  spes  tanta  nepotum, 
Barbarico  postes  auro  spoliisque  superbi, 
Procubuere ;  tenent  Danai,  qua  deficit  ignis.  505 

Forsitan  et,  Priami  fuerint  quae  fata,  requiras. 
Urbis  uti  captae  casum  convulsaque  vidit 
Limina  tectorum  et  medium  in  penetraKbus  bostem, 
Arma  diu  senior  desueta  trementibus  aevo 
Circumdat  nequidquam  bumeris,  et  inutile  ferrum       510 
Cingitur,  ac  densos  fertur  moriturus  in  hostes. 
Aedibus  in  mediis  nudoque  sub  aetheris  axe 
Ingens  ara  fuit,  juxtaque  veterrima  laurus, 
Incumbens  arae  atque  umbra  complexa  Penates  : 
Hic  Hecuba  et  natae  nequidquam  altaria  circum,         515 
Praecipites  atra  ceu  tempestate  columbae, 
Condensae  et  divum  amplexae  simulacra^sedebant. 
Ipsum  autem  sumtis  Priamum  juvenalibus  armis 
Ut  vidit ;  "  Quae  mens  tam  dira,  miserrime  conjux, 
"  Impuht  his  cingi  telis,  aut  quo  ruis  ?''  inquit,  520 

"  Non  tali  auxiho  nec  defensoribus  istis 
"  Tempus  eget ;  non,  si  ipsc  meus  nunc  aiforet  Hector. 
"  Huc  tandem  concede  :  haec  ara  tuebitur  omnes, 
"  Aut  moriere  simul."     Sic  ore  effata,  recepit 
Ad  sese  et  sacra  longaevum  in  sede  locavit.  525 

Bcce  autem  elapsus  Pyrrhi  de  caede  Polites, 
Unus  natorum  Priami,  per  tela,  per  hostes 
Porticibus  longis  fugit,  et  vacua  atria  lustrat 
Saucius  ;  illum  ardens  infesto  vulnere  Pyrrhus 
Insequitur,  jam  jamquemanu  tenet  et  premit  hasta  ;    530 
Ut  tandem  ante  oculos  evasit  et  ora  parentum. 


C 


42  AENEIDOS    LIB.    II. 

Concidit  ac  multo  vitam  cum  sanguine  fudit. 
Hic  Priamus,  quamquam  in  media  jam  morte  tenetur, 
Non  tamen  abstinuit,  nec  voci  iracque  pcpercit ; 
"  At  tibi  pro  scelere,"  exclamat,'-  pro  talibus  ausis       535 
"  Di,  si  qua  est  coelo  pietas,  quae  talia  curet, 
"  Persolvant  grates  dignas  et  praemia  reddant 
"  Debita,  qui  nati  coram  me  cernere  letum 
"  Fccisti  et  patrios  foedasti  funere  vultus. 
"  At  non  ille,  satum  quo  te  mentiris,  Acbilles  540 

"  Talis  in  hoste  fuit  Priamo,  sed  jiira  fidemque 
"  Sui»plicis  erubuit,  corpusque  exsangue  sepulcro 
"  Keddidit  Hectoreum,  meque  in  mea  regna  remisit." 
Sic  fatus  senior,  telumque  imbelle  sine  ictu 
Conjecit,  rauco  quod  protinus  aere  repulsum  545 

Et  summo  clipei  nequidquam  umbone  pependit. 
Cui  Pyrrhus :  "  Keferes  ergo  haec  et  nuntius  ibis 
"  Pelidae  2:enitori :  illi  mea  tristia  flicta 
"■  Degeneremque  Neoptolemum  narrare  memento. 
"  Nunc  morere."  Hoc  dicens,  altaria  ad  ipsa  trementem  550 
Traxit  et  in  multo  lapsantem  sanguine  nati, 
Implicuitque  comam  laeva,  dextraque  coruscum 
Extulit  ac  lateri  capulo  tenus  abdidit  ensem. 
Haec  finis  Priami  fatorum ;  hic  exitus  illum 
Sorte  tulit,  Trojam  incensam  et  prolapsa  videntem      555 
Pergama,  tot  quondam  populis  terrisque  superbum 
Regu^torem  Asiae  :  jacet  ingens  litore  truncus, 
Avulsumque  humeris  caput  et  sine  nomine  corpus. 
At  me  tum  primum  saevus  circumstetit  horror. 
(^  Obstupui :  subiit  cari  genitoris  imago,  560 

Ut  regem  aequaevum  crudeli  vulnere  vidi 
Vitam  exhalantem;  siibiit  deserta  Crciisa 
Et  dhepta  domus  et  parvi  casus  luli. 
Respicio  et,  quae  sit  me  circuin  copia,  lustro. 
Ueseo^re  omnes  defessi,  ct  corpora  saltu  565 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    II.  43 

Ad  terram  misere  aut  ignibus  aegra  dederc. 
[Jamque  adeo  super  uqus  eram,  quum  limina  Vestae 
Servantem  et  tacitam  secreta  in  sede  latentem 
Tyndarida  adspicio :  dant  clara  incendia  lucem 
Erranti  passimque  oculos  per  cuncta  ferenti.  570 

IUa  sibi  infestos  eversa  ob  Pergama  Teucros, 
Et  poenas  Danaum  et  deserti  conjugis  iras 
Praemetuens,  Trojae  et  patriae  communis  Erinys, 
Abdiderat  sese  atque  aris  invisa  sedebat. 
Exarsere  ignes  animo,  subit  ira  cadentem  5^5 

Ulcisci  patriam  et  sceleratas  sumere  poenas. 
"  Scilicet  haec  Spartam  incolumis  patriasque  Mycenas 
"  Adspiciet,  partoque  ibit  regina  triumpbo, 
"  Conjugiumque  domumque  patres  natosque  videbit, 
"  Iliadum  turba  et  Phrygiis  comitata  ministris?  580 

"  Occiderit  ferro  Priamus,  Troja  arserit  igni, 
"  Dardanium  totics  sudarit  sanguine  litus  ? 
"  Non  ita :  namque  etsi  nullum  memorabile  nomen 
"  Feminea  in  poena  est  nec  habet  victdria  laudem, 
"  Exstinxisse  nefas  tamen  et  sumsisse  merentis  585 

"  Laudabor  poenas,  animumque  explesse  juvabit 
"  Ultricis  flammae  et  cineres  satiasse  meorum." 
Talia  jactabam  et  furiata  mente  ferebar  ;] 
Quum  mihi  se,  non  ante  oculis  tam  clara,  videndam 
Obtulit  et  pura  per  noctem  in  luce  refulsit  590 

Alma  parens,  confessa  deam,  qualisque  videri 
Coelicohs  et  quanta  solet,  dextraque  prehensum 
Continuit,  roseoque  haec  insuper  addidit  ore  : 
'  Nate,  quis  indomitas  tantus  dolor  excitat  iras  ? 
'■'  Quid  furis,  aut  quonam  nostri  tibi  cura  recessit  ?       595 
"  Non  prius  adspicies,  ubi  fessum  aetate  parentem 
*'  Liqueris  Anchisen,  superet  conjuxne  Gretisa 
"  Ascaniusque  puer,  quos  omnes  undique  Graiae 
"  Circum  errant  acies,  et,  ni  mea  cura  resistat, 


44  AENEIDOS   LIB,    II. 

Jam  flammae  tulerkit  inimicus  et  hauserit  ensis.       600 
Non  tibi  Tyndaridis  facics  invisa  Lacaenae 
Culpatusve  Paris,  divum  inclementia,.  divum, 
Plas  Gvcrtit  opcs  sternitque  a  culmine  Trojam. 
Adspicc-namque  omnem,  quae  nunc  obducta  tuenti 
Mortales  hebetat  visus  tibi  et  humida  circum  605 

Caligat,  nubem  eripiam  :  tu  uc  qua  parentis 
Jussa  time,  ncu  praeceptis  parere  recusa  !-, 
Hic  ubi  disjectas  moles  avulsaque  saxis 
Saxa  vides  mixtoque  undantcm  pulvere  fumum, 
Neptunus  muros  magnoque  emota  tridenti  610 

Fundamenta  quatit,  totamquc  a  sedibus  urbem 
Eruit ;  hic  Juno  Scaeas  saevissima  portas 
Prima  tcnet,  sociumque  furcns  a  navibus  agmen 
Ferro  accincta  vocat. 

Jam  summas  arces  Tritonia,  respice,  Pallas  615 

Insedit,  nimbo  effulgens  et  Gorgone  saeva ; 
Ijjsc  pater  Danais  animos  viresque  secundas 
Sufiicit,  ipse  Deos  in  Dardana  suscitat  arma. 
Eripe,  nate,  fugam,  finemque  impone  labori. 
Nusquam  abero,  et  tutum  patrio  te  limine  sistam."  620 
Dixerat,  et  spissis  noctis  se  condidit  umbris  ; 
Apparent  dirae  facies  inimicaque  Trojae 
Numina  magna  deum. 

Tum  vero  omne  mihi  visum  considerc  in  igncs 
Ilium  et  cx  imo  vcrti  Ncptunia  Troja,  625 

Ac  veluti  summis  antiquam  in  montibus  ornum 
Quum  ferro  accisam  crebrisque  bipennibus  instant 
Eruere  agricolac  certatim  ;  illa  usque  minatur 
Et  tremefacta  comam  concusso  vertice  nutat, 
Vulncribus  donec  paullatim  cvicta  supremum  630 

Congemuit  traxitque  jugis  avulsa  ruinam. 
Descendo,  ac  duceute  deo  flammam  intcr  et  hostcs 
Expedior  :  dant  tela  locum,  flammaeque  recedunt. 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    II.  45 

Atque  ubi  jam  patriae  perventura  ad  limina  sedis 
Antiquasque  domos  :  genitor,  quem  toUere  in  altos      635 
Optabam  primum  montes  primumque  petebam, 
Abnegat  excisa  vitam  producere  Troja 
Exsiliumque  pati.     "  Vos  o,  quibus  integer  aevi 
"  Sanguis  "  ait  "  solidaeque  suo  stant  robore  vires, 
"  Vos  agitate  fugam  ;  C40 

"  Me  si  coelicolae  voluissent  ducere  vitam, 
*'  Has  mibi  servassent  sedes.     Satis  una  superque 
"  Vidimus  escidia  et  captae  sujDeravimus  urbi, 
"  Sic  0,  sic  positum  affati  discedite  corpus. 
"  Ipse  manu  mortem  inveniam ;  miserebitur  hostis      645 
"  Esuviasque  petet.     Facilis  jactura  sepulcri. 
"  Jam  pridem  invisus  divis  et  inutilis  annos 
"  Demoror,  ex  quo  me  divum  pater  atque  hominum  rex 
'■  Fulminis  afflavit  ventis  et  contigit  iffni." 
Talia  pcrstabat  memorans,  fixusque  manebat ;  650 

Nos  contra  efFusi  lacrimis  conjuxque  Cretisa 
Ascaniusque  omnisque  domus,  ne  vertere  secum 
Cuncta  pater  fatoque  urgenti  incumbere  vellet. 
Abnegat,  inceptoque  et  sedibus  haeret  in  isdem. 
Kursus  in  arma  feror,  mortemque  miserrimus  opto.       655 
Nam  quod  consilium  aut  quae  jam  fortuna  dabatur  ? 
"  Mene  efferre  pedem,  genitor,  te  posse  relicto 
"  Sperasti,  tantumque  nefas  patrio  excidit  ore  ? 
"  Si  nihil  ex  tanta  superis  placet  urbe  relinqui, 
''  Et  sedet  hoc  animo,  perituraeque  addere  Trojae        660 
•'*  Teque  tuosque  juvat ;  patet  isti  janua  leto, 
"  Jamque  aderit  multo  Priami  de  sanguine  Pyrrhus, 
"  Gnatum  ante  ora  patris,  patrem  qui  obtruncat  ad  aras, 
"  Hoc  erat,  alma  parens,  quod  me  per  tela,  per  ignes 
"  Eripis  ;  ut  mediis  hostem  in  penetralibus,  utque       665 
"  Ascanium  patremque  meum  juxtaque  Cretisam, 
' '  Alterum  in  alterius  mactatos  sanguine  cernam  ? 


46  AENEIDOS    LIB.    II. 

"  Arma,  viri,  ferte  arma  :  vocat  lux  ultima  victos ! 

"  Redditc  me  Danais  !  siiiitc  instaurata  revisam 

"  Proelia  !    Numquam  omncs  hodic  moriemur  inulti."  670 

Hinc  ferro  accingor  rursus,  clipeoquc  siuistram 

Insertabam  aptans  meque  extra  tecta  ferebam  ; 

Ecce  autem  complexa  pedes  in  limine  conjux 

Hacrebat,  parvumque  patri  tendebat  lulum. 

"  Si  periturus  abis,  et  nos  rape  in  omnia  tecum  ;  675 

"  Sin  aliquam  expertus  sumtis  spem  ponis  in  armis, 

"  Hanc  primum  tutare  domum.     Cui  parvus  lulus, 

"  Cui  pater  et  conjux  quondam  tua  dicta  relinquor  ?  " 

Talia  vociferans  gemitu  tectum  omne  replebat, 

Quum  subitum  dictuque  oritur  mirabile  monstrum.      680 

Namque  manus  inter  maestorumque  ora  parentum 

Ecce  levis  summo  de  vertice  visus  luli 

Fundere  lumen  apex,  tactuque  innoxia  molles 

Lambere  fiamma  comas  et  circum  tempora  pasci. 

Nos  pavidi  trepidare  metu,  crinemque  flagrantem         685 

Excutere  et  sanctos  restinguere  fontibus  ignes. 

At  pater  Ancbises  oculos  ad  sidera  laetus 

Extulit,  et  coelo  palmas  cum  voce  tetendit : 

"  Jupiter  omnipotens,  precibus  si  flecteris  uUis, 

"  Adspice  nos  :  boc  tantum ;  et,  si  pietate  meremur,  690 

"  Da  deinde  auxilium,  pater,  atque  baec  omina  firma." 

Vix  ea  fatus  erat  senior,  subitoque  fragore 

Intonuitlaevum,  et  de  coelo  lapsa  per  umbras 

Stella  faccm  duccns  multa  cum  luce  cucurrit. 

lllam,  summa  supcr  labcntem  culmina  tecti,  695 

Cernimus  Idaea  claram  se  condere  silva, 

Signantemque  vias ;  tum  longo  limite  sulcus 

Dat  lucem,  et  late  circum  loca  sulfure  fumant. 

Hic  vero  victus  genitor  sc  tollit  ad  auras, 

Alfaturque  deos  et  sanctum  sidus  adorat.  700 

"  Jam  jam  nulla  mora  est :  sequor  ct,  qua  ducitis,  adsum. 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    II.  47 

''  Di  patrii,  serrate  domum,  servate  nejDotem  ! 
"  Vestrum  hoc  augurium,  vestroque  in  numine  Troja  cst. 
"  Cedo  equidem  nec,  nate,  tibi  comes  ire  recuso." 
Dixerat  ille,  et  jam  per  moenia  clarior  ignis  705 

Auditur,  propiusque  aestus  incendia  volvunt. 
"  Ergo  age,  care  pater,  cervici  imponere  nostrae  ; 
'  Ipse  subibo  humeris,  nec  me  labor  iste  gravabit : 
'  Quo  res  cumque  cadent,  unum  et  commune  periclum, 
'  Una  salus  ambobus  erit.     Mihi  parvus  lulus  710 

'  Sit  comes,  et  longe  servet  vestigia  conjux. 
'  Vos,  famuli,  quae  dicam,  animis  advertite  vestris. 
'  Est  urbe  egressis  tumulus  templumque  vetustum 
'  Desertae  Cereris,  juxtaque  antiqua  cupressus 
'  Religione  patrum  multos  servata  per-annos  ;  715 

'  Hanc  ex  diverso  sedem  veniemus  in  unam. 
'  Tu,  genitor,  cape  sacra  manu  patriosque  Penates  : 
'  Me  bello  e  tanto  digressum  et  caede  recenti 
'  Attrectare  nefas,  donec  me  flumine  vivo 
'Abluero."  720 

Haec  fatus,  latos  humeros  subjectaque  colla 
Veste  super  fulvique  insternor  pelle  leonis, 
Succedoque  oneri ;  dextrae  se  parvus  lulus 
Implicuit  sequiturque  patrem  non  passibus  aequis  ; 
Pone  subit  conjux.     Ferimur  per  opaca  locorum  ;         725 
Et  me,  quem  dudum  non  ulla  injecta  movebant 
Tela  neque  adverso  glomerati  ex  agmine  Graii, 
Nunc  omnes  terrent  aurae,  sonus  excitat  omnis 
Suspensum  et  pariter  comitique  onerique  timentcm. 
Jamque  propinquabam  portis  omnemque  videbar  730 

Evasisse  viam,  subito  quum  creber  ad  aures 
Visus  adesse  pedum  sonitus,  genitorque  per  umbram 
Prospiciens  "  Nate,"  exclamat  "  fuge,  nate  ;  propinquant : 
"  Ardentes  clipeos  atque  aera  micantia  cerno." 
Hic  mihi  nescio  quod  trepido  male  numen  amicum      735 


48  AENEIDOS    LIB.    II. 

Confusam  eripuit  mentem  :  namque  avia  cursu 

Dum  scquor  et  nota  excedo  regione  viarum, 

Heu,  misero  conjux  fatone  erepta  Cretisa 

Substitit,  crravitne  via,  seu  lassa  resedit, 

Incertum  ;  nec  post  oculis  est  reddita  nostris  ;  740 

Nec  prius  amissam  respexi  animumve  reflexi, 

Quam  tumulum  antiquae  Cereris  sedemque  sacratam 

Venimus  :  liic  demum  collectis  omnibus  una  , 

Dsfuit,  et  comites  natumque  virumque  fefellit. 

Quem  non  incusavi  amens  liominumque  deorumque,    745 

Aut  quid  in  eversa  vidi  crudelius  urbe  ? 

Ascanium  Anchisenque  patrem  Teucrosque  Penates 

Commendo  sociis,  et  curva  valle  recondo  ; 

Ipse  urbem  repeto,'  et  cingor  fulgentibus  armis  : 

Stat  casus  renovare  omnes,  omnemque  reverti  750 

Per  Trojam,  et  rursus  caput  objectare  periclis. 

Principio  muros  obscuraque  limina  portae, 

Qua  gressum  extuleram,  repeto,  et  vestigia  retro 

Observata  sequor  per  noctem  et  lumine  lustro  : 

Horror  ubique  animos,  simul  ipsa  silentia  terrent.         755 

Inde  domum,  si  forte  pedem,  si  forte,  tulisset, 

Me  refero :  irruerant  Danai  et  tectum  omne  tenebant, 

Ilicet  ignis  edax  summa  ad  f^stigia  vento 

Volvitur ;  exsuperant  flammae,  furit  aestus  ad  auras. 

Procedo  et  Priami  sedes  arcemque  reviso :  760 

Et  jam  porticibus  vacuis  Junonis  asylo 

Custodes  lecti  Phoenix  et  dirus  Ulixes 

Pracdam  asservabant :  huc  undique  Troia  gaza 

Incensis  erepta  adytis,  mensaeque  deorum, 

Crateresque  auro  solidi,  captivaque  vcstis  765 

Congeritur ;  pueri  et  pavidae  longo  ordine  matres 

Stant  circum. 

Ausus  quin  etiam  voces  jactare  per  umbram, 

Tmplevi  clamore  vias,  maestusque  Creiisam 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    II.  49 

Nequidquam  ingeminans  iterumque  iterumque  vocavi.  770 
Quaerenti  et  tectis  urbis  sine  fine  furenti, 
Infelix  simulacrum  atque  ipsius  umbra  Creiisae 
Visa  mihi  ante  oculos  et  nota  major  imago- 
Obstupui,  steteruntque  comae  et  vox  faucibus  haesit-, 
Tum  sic  affari  et  curas  his  demere  dictis :  775 

''  Quid  tantum  insano  juvat  indulgere  dolori, 
"  0  dulcis  conjux  ?  non  haec  sine  numiue  diviim 
"Eveniunt  jniec  te  comitem  hinc  portare  Creiisam 
"  Fas,  aut  ille  sinit  superi  regnator  Olympi. 
"  Longa  tibi  exsilia,  et  vastum  maris  aequor  arandum  ;  780 
"  Et  terram  Hesj)eriam  venies,  ubi  Lydius  arva 
"  Inter  opima  viriim  leni  fluit  agmine  Thybris. 
"  IUic  res  laetae  regnumque  et  regia  conjux 
"  Parta  tibi :  lacrimas  dilectae  pelle  Creiisae. 
"  Non  ego  Myrmidonum  sedes  Dolopumve  superbas      785 
"  Adspiciam,  aut  Graiis  servitum  matribus  ibo, 
,"  Dardanis  et  divae  Veneris  nurus ; 
"  Sed  me  magna  deum  Genetrix  his  detinet  oris. 
"  Jamque  vale,  et  nati  serva  communis  amorem." 
Haec  ubi  dicta  dedit,  laciimantem  et  multa  volentem  790 
Dicere  deseruit,  tenuesque  recessit  in  auras. 
Tei:  conatus  ibi  collo  dare  brachia  circum, 
Ter  frustra  comprensa  manus  effugit  imago, 
Par  levibus  ventis  volucrique  simillima  somno. 
Sic  demum  socios  consumta  nocte  reviso.  795 

Atque  hic  ingentem  comitum  affluxisse  novorum 
Invenio  admirans  numerum,  matresque  virosque, 
Collectam  exsilio  pubem,  miserabile  vulgus. 
Undique  convenere  animis  opibusque  parati, 
In  quascumque  velim  pelago  deducere  terras.  800 

Jamque  jugis  summae  surgebat  Lucifer  Idae 
Ducebatque  diem  ;  Danaique  obsessa  tenebant 
Limina  portarum,  nec  spes  opis  ulla  dabatur : 
Cessi  et  sublato  montes  genitore  petivi." 


P.  VIRGILII  MAROXIS 

AENEIDOS 

LIBER  TEKTIUS. 


*'  Postquam  res  Asiae  Priamique  evertere  gcntem 

Immeritam  visum  supcris,  ccciditque  supcrbum 

Ilium  et  omnis  humo  fumat  Neptunia  Troja ; 

Diversa  exsilia  et  dcsertas  quaercre  terras 

Auguriis  agimur  divum,  classemque  sub  ipsa  5 

Antandro  et  Phrygiae  molimur  montibus  Idae, 

Incerti,  quo  fata  ferantj  ubi  sistere  dctur, 

Contrahimusque  viros.     Vix  prima  inceperat  aestas, 

Et  pater  Anchises  dare  fatis  vcla  jubebat : 

Litora  quum  patriae  lacrimans  portusquc  rehnquo  10 

Et  campos,  ubi  Troja  fuit.     Feror  exsul  in  altum 

Cum  sociis  gnatoque  Penatibus  et  magnis  dis. 

Terra  procul  vastis  colitur  Mavortia  campis- 
Thraces  arant-,  acri  quondam  regnata  Lycurgo, 
Hospitium  antiquum  Trojae,  sociique  Penates,  15 

Dum  fortuna  fuit :  feror  huc,  et  litore  curvo 
Moenia  prima  loco,  fatis  ingrcssus  iniquiS; 
Aencadasque  mco  nomcn  dc  nomine  fingo. 
Sacra  Dionaeao  matri  divisque  ferebam 
Auspicibus  coeptorum  operum,  superoque  nitentem       20 
Coeiicolura  regi  mactabam  in  litore  taurum. 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    III.  51 

Forte  fuit  juxta  tumulus,  quo  cornea  summo 

Virgulta  et  densis  liastilibus  liorrida  myrtus. 

Accessi,  viridemque  ab  liumo  convellure  silvam 

Conatus,  ramis  tegerem  ut  frondentibus  aras,  25 

Horrendum  et  dictu  video  mirabile  monstrum. 

Nam  quae  prima  solo  ruptis  radicibus  arbos 

Vellitur,  huic  atro  liquuntur  sanguine  guttae, 

Et  terram  tabo  maculant.     Mihi  frigidus  horror 

Membra  quatit,  gelidusque  coit  formidine  sanguis.  30 

Kursus  et  alterius  lentum  convellere  vimen 

Insequor,  et  causas  penitus  tentare  latentes ; 

Ater  et  alterius  sequitur  de  cortice  sanguis. 

Multa  movens  animo,  Nymphas  venerabar  agrestes 

Gradivumque  patrem,  Geticis  qui  praesidet  arvis,  35 

Rite  secundarent  visus  omenque  levarent. 

Tertia  sed  postquam  majore  hastilia  nisu 

Aggredior  genibusque  adversae  obluctor  arenae ;- 

Eloquar,  an  sileam  ?-  gemitus  lacrimabilis  imo 

Auditur  tumulo,  et  vox  reddita  fertur  ad  aures  :  40 

"  Quid  miserum,  Aenea,  laceras  ?  Jam  parce  sepulto, 

*'  Parce  pias  scelerare  manus :  non  me  tibi  Troja 

"  Externum  tulit,  aut  cruor  hic  de  stipite  manat. 

"Heu  fuge  crudeles  terras,  fuge  litus  avarum  : 

"  Nam  Polydorus  ego.     Hic  confixum  ferrea  texit  45 

"  Telorum  seges  et  jaculis  increvit  acutis." 

Tum  vero  ancipiti  mentem  formidine  pressus 

Obstupui,  steteruntque  comae  et  vox  faucibus  haesit. 

Hunc  Polydorum  auri  quondam  cum  pondere  magno 

Infelix  Priamus  furtim  mandarat  alendum  50 

Threicio  regi,  quum  jam  diffideret  armis 

Dardaniae  cingique  urbem  obsidione  videret. 

IUe,  ut  opes  fractae  Teucrum,  et  Fortuna  recessit, 

Res  Agamemnonias  victriciaque  arma  secutus, 

Fas  omne  abrumpit,  Poiydorum  obtruncat,  et  auro        55 


52  AENEIDOS   LIB,    IIL 

Vi  potitur.     Quid  non  mortalia  pectora  cogis, 
Auri  sacra  fames  ?     Postquam  pavor  ossa  reliquit ; 
Delectos  populi  ad  proceres  primumn[ue  parentem 
Monstra  deum  refero  et,  quae  sit  sententia,  posco. 
Omnibus  idem  animus,  scelerata  excedere  terra,  60 

Linqui  poUutum  liospitium  et  dare  classibus  austros, 
Ergo  instauramus  Polydoro  funus,  et  ingens 
Asseritur  tumulo  tellus  :  stant  Manibus  arae 
Caeruleis  maestae  vittis  atraque  cupresso, 
Et  circum  Iliades  crinem  de  more  solutae  ;  65 

.  Inferimus  tepido  spumantia  cymbia  lacte 
Sanguinis  et  sacri  pateras,  animamque  sepulcro 
Condimus,  et  magna  supremum  voce  ciemus. 
Inde,  ubi  prima  fides  pelago,  placataque  venti 
Dant  maria,  et  lenis  crepitans  vocat  auster  in  altum,     70 
Deducunt  socii  naves  et  litora  complent. 
Provehimur  portu,  terraeque  urbesque  recedunt. 

Sacra  mari  colitur  medio  gratissima  tellus 
Nereidum  matri  et  Neptuno  Aegaeo, 
Quam  pius  Arcitenens,  oras  et  litora  circum  75 

Errantem,  Mycono  e  celsa  Gyaroque  revinxit, 
Immotamque  coli  dedit  et  contemnere  ventos  : 
Huc  feror  ;  haec  fessos  tuto  placidissima  portu 
Accipit.     Egressi  veneramur  Apollinis  urbem. 
Rex  Anius,  rex  idem  hominum  Phoebique  sacerdos,       80 
Vittis  et  sacra  redimitus  tempora  lauro, 
Occurrit,  veterem  Anchisen  agnoscit  amicum  : 
Jungimus  hospitio  dextras,  et  tecta  subimus. 
Templa  dei  saxo  venerabar  structa  vetusto  : 
"  Da  propriam,  Thymbraee,  domum !  Da  moenia  fossis  85 
"  Et  genus  et  mansuram  urbem  !     Serva  altcra  Trojae 
"  Pergama,  reliquias  Danaum  atque  immitis  Achilli. 
"  Quem  sequimur,  quove  ire  jubes,  ubi  ponere  sedes  ? 
"  Da,  pater,  augurium,  atque  animis  illabere  nostris  !" 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    III.  53 

Vix  ea  fatus  eram  ;  tremere  omnia  visa  repente,  90 

Liminaque  laurusque  dei,  totusque  moveri 

Mons  circum,  et  mugire  adytis  cortina  reclusis. 

Submissi  petimus  terram,  et  vox  fertur  ad  aures : 

"  Dardanidae  duri,  quae  vos  a  stirpe  parentum 

"  Prima  tulit  tcllus,  eadem  vos  ubere  laeto  95 

"  Accipiet  reduces :  antiquam  exquirite  matrem. 

"  Hic  domus  Aeneae  cunctis  dominabitur  oris, 

"  Et  nati  natorum,  et  qui  nascentur  ab  illis." 

Haec  Phoebus,  mixtoque  ingens  exorta  tumultu 

Laetitia,  et  cuncti,  quae.  sint  ea  moenia,  quaerunt,       100 

Quo  Phoebus  vocet  errantes  jubeatque  reverti. 

Tum  genitor,  veterum  volvens  monumenta  virorum, 

"  Audite,  0  proceres,"  ait  "  et  spes  discite  vestras, 

"  Creta  Jovis  magni  medio  jacet  insula  ponto, 

"  Mons  Idaeus  ubi  et  gentis  cunabula  nostrae ;  105 

"  Centum  urbes  habitant  magnas,  uberrima  regna  : 

"  Maximus  unde  pater,  si  rite  audita  recordor, 

"  Teucrus  Ehoeteas  primum  est  advectus  ad  oras, 

"  Optavitque  locum  regno.     Nondum  Ilium  et  arces 

"  Pergameae  steterant ;  habitabant  vallibus  imis.        110 

"  Hinc  mater  cultrix  Cybelae,  Corybantiaque  aera, 

"  Idaeumque  nemus  ;  hinc  fida  silentia  sacris, 

"  Et  juncti  currum  dominae  subiere  leones. 

"  Ergo  agite  et,  divum  ducunt  qua  jussa,  sequamur, 

"  Placemus  ventos,  et  Gnosia  regna  petamus  !  lli» 

"  Nec  longo  distant  cursu :  modo  Jupiter  adsit, 

"  Tertia  lux  classem  Cretaeis  sistet  in  oris." 

Sic  fatus,  meritos  aris  mactavit  honores, 

Taurum  Neptuno,  taurum  tibi,  pulcher  Apollo, 

Nigram  Hiemi  pecudem,  Zephyris  folicibus  albam.       120 

Fama  volat,  pulsum  regnis  cessisse  paternis 
Idomenea  ducem,  desertaque  litora  Cretae, 
Hoste  vacare  domos,  sedesquo  adstare  relictas. 


54  AENEIDOS    LIB.    III. 

Linquimus  Ortygiae  portus,  pelagoque  volamus, 

Bacchatamque  jugis  Naxon  viridemque  Donusam,        125 

Olearon  niveamque  Paron,  sparsasque  per  aequor 

Cycladas  et  crebris  legimus  freta  concita  terris. 

Nauticus  exoritur  vario  certamiue  clamor, 

Hortantur  socii,  Cretam  proavosque  petamus  ; 

Prosequitur  surgcns  a  puppi  ventus  euntes,  130 

Et  tandem  antiquis  Curetum  allabimur  oris. 

Ergo  avidus  muros  optatae  molior  urbis, 

Pergameamque  voco,  et  laetam  cognomine  gentem 

Hortor  amare  focos  arcemque  attollere  tectis. 

Jamque  fere  sicco  subductae  litore  puj)pes,  135 

Connubiis  arvisque  novis  operata  juventus  ; 

Jura  domosque  dabam :  subito  quum  tabida  membris, 

Corrupto  coeli  tractu,  miserandaque  venit 

Arboribusque  satisque  lues  et  letifer  annus. 

Linquebant  dulcos  animas,  aut  aegra  traliebant  140 

Corpora  ;  tum  steriles  exurere  Sirius  agros  ; 

Arebant  lierbae  et  victum  seges  aegra  negabat. 

Rursus  ad  oraclum  Ortygiae  Phoebumque  remensc 

Hortatur  pater  ire  mari,  veniamque  precari, 

Quam  fessis  finem  rebus  ferat,  unde  laborum  145 

Tentare  auxilium  jubeat,  quo  vertere  cursus. 

Nox  erat,  et  terris  animalia  Fomnus  habebat : 

Eflfigies  sacrae  divum  Phrygiique  Penates, 

Quob  mecum  ab  Troja  mediisque  cx  ignibus  urbis 

Extuleram,  visi  ante  oculos  adstare  jacentis  150 

In  somnis,  multo  manifesti  lumine,  qua  se 

Plena  per  insertas  fundebat  luna  fenestras ; 

Tum  sic  affari  et  curas  his  dcmere  dictis : 

"  Quod  tibi  delato  Ortygiam  dicturus  Apollo  est, 

*'  Hic  canit  et  tua  nos  en  ultro  ad  limina  mittit.  155 

*'  Nos  te,  Dardania  incensa,  tuaquc  arma  secuti, 

"  Nos  tumidum  sub  te  permensi  classibus  acquor, 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    III.  55 

"  Idem  venturos  toUemus  in  astra  nepotes, 

"  Imperiumque  urbi  dabimus :  tu  moenia  magnis 

"  Magna  para,  longumque  fugae  ne  linque  laborem.     160 

•'  Mutandae  sedes  :  non  liaec  tibi  litora  suasit 

"  Delius,  aut  Cretae  jussit  considere,  Apollo. 

"  Est  locus,  Hesperiam  Graii  cognomine.dicunt, 

"  Terra  antiqua,  potens  armis  atque  ubere  glebae- 

"  Oenotri  coluere  viri;  nunc  fama,  minores  165 

"  Italiam  dixisse  ducis-de  nomine  gentem-: 

"  Hae  nobis  propriae  sedes  ;  hinc  Dardanus  ortus 

"  lasiusque  pater,  genus  a  quo  principe  nostrum. 

"  Surge  age,  et  haec  laetus  longaevo  dicta  parenti 

"  Haud  dubitanda  refer  :  Corythum  terrasque  requirat  170 

"  Ausonias.     Dictaea  negat  tibi  Jupiter  arva." 

Talibus  attonitus  visis  ac  voce  deorum- 

Nec  sopor  illud  erat,  sed  coram  agnoscere  vultus 

Velatasque  comas  praesentiaque  ora  videbar ; 

Tum  gelidus  toto  manabat  corpore  sudor-,  175 

Corripio  e  stratis  corpus,  tendoque  supinas 

Ad  coelum  cum  voce  manus,  et  munera  libo 

Intemerata  focis.     Perfecto  laetus  honore 

Anchisen  facio  certum,  remque  ordine  pando. 

Agnovit  prolem  ambiguam  geminosque  parentes,  180 

Seque  novo  veterum  deceptum  errore  locorum. 

Tum  memorat  :  "  Nate,  IHacis  exercite  fatis, 

"  Sola  mihi  tales  casus  Cassandra  canebat ; 

"  Nunc  repeto  haec  generi  portenderc  debita  nostio, 

"  Et  saepe  Hesperiam,  saepe  Itala  regna  vocare.  185 

"  Sed  quis  ad  Hesperiae  venturos  litora  Teucros 

"  Crederet,  aut  quem  tum  vates  Cassandra  moveret  ? 

"  Cedamus  Phoebo,  et  moniti  meliora  seq^uamur  ! " 

Sic  ait,  et  cuncti  dicto  parcmus  ovautes  : 

Hanc  quoque  deserimus  sedem,  paucisoLue  relictis  190 

Vehi  damus,  vastumque  cava  trabe  currimus  acquor. 


56  AENEIDOS    LIB,    III. 

Postquam  altum  tenuere  rates,  nec  jam  amplius  uUae 
Apparent  terrae,  coelum  undique  et  undique  pontus ; 
Tum  milii  caeruleus  supra  caput  adstitit  imber 
Noctem  liiemcmque  ferens,  et  inhorruit  unda  tenebris.  195 
Continuo  vcnti  volvunt  mare  magnaque  surgunt 
Aequora  :   dispersi  jactamur  gurgite  vasto. 
Involvere  diem  nimbi,  et  nox  humida  coelum 
Abstulit ;  ingeminant  abruptis  nubibus  ignes  : 
Excutimur  cursu,  et  caecis**erramus  in  undis.  200 

Ipse  diem  noctemque  n^gat  discernere  coelo, 
Nec  meminisse  viae  media  Palinurus  in  unda. 
Tres  adeo  incertos  caeca  caligine  soles 
Erramus  pelago,  totidem  sine  sidere  noctes ; 
Quarto  terra  die  primum  se  attoUere  tandem  205 

Visa,  aperire  procul  montes  ac  volvere  fumum. 
Vela  cadunt,  remis  insurgimus ;  haud  mora,  nautae 
Annixi  torquent  spumas  et  caerula  verrunt. 
Servatum  ex  undis  Strophadum  me  htora  primum 
Accipiunt :  Strophades  Graio  stant  nomine  dictae        210 
Insulae  lonio  in  magno,  quas  dira  Celaeno 
Harpyiaeque  cohmt  aliae,  Phineia  postquam 
Clausa  domus,  mcnsasque  metu  liquere  priores. 
Tristius  haud  illis  monstrum,  nec  saevior  uUa 
Pestis  et  ira  deum  Stygiis  sese  extuUt  undis.  215 

Virginei  volucrum  vuUus,  foedissima  vcntris 
Proluvies,  uncaequc  manus,  et  paUida  semper 
Ora  famc. 

Huc  ubi  delati  portus  intravimus  ;  ecce 
Laeta  boum  passim  campis  armcnta  videmus  220 

Caprigenumque  pecus,  nuUo  custode,  per  herbas. 
Irruimus  ferro,  et  divos  ipsumquc  vocamus 
In  partem  praedamque  Jovem ;  tum  Utore  curvo 
Exstruimusque  toros,  dapibusque  epulamur  opimis. 
At  subitae  horrifico  lapsu  dc  montibus  adsunt  225 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    III.  57 

Harpyiae  et  magnis  quatiunt  clangoribus  alas, 

Diripiuntque  dapes,  contactuque  omnia  foedant 

Immundo  ;  tum  vox  tetrum  dira  inter  odorem. 

Kursum  in  secessu  longo  sub  rupe  cavata, 

Arboribus  clausi  circum  atque  liorrentibus  umbris,       230 

Instruimus  mcnsas,  arisque  reponimus  ignem  ; 

Rursum  ex  diverso  coeli  caecisque  latebris 

Turba  sonans  praedam  pedibus  circumvolat  uncis, 

Polluit  ore  dapes.     Sociis  tunc,  arma  capessant, 

Edico,  et  dira  bellum  cum  gente  gerendum.  235 

Haud  secus  ac  jussi  faciunt,  tecto^que  per  berbam 

Disponunt  enses  et  scuta  latentia  condunt. 

Ergo  ubi  delapsae  sonitum  per  curva  dedere 

Litora  ;  dat  signum  specula  Misenus  ab  alta 

Aere  cavo.     Invadunt  socii  et  nova  proelia  tentant,     240 

Obscenas  pelagi  ferro  foedare  volucres. 

Sed  neque  vim  plumis  ullam  nec  vulnera  tergo 

Accipiunt,  celerique  fuga  sub  sidera  lapsae 

Semiesam  praedam  et  vestigia  foeda  relinquunt. 

Una  in  praecelsa  consedit  rupe  Celaeno,  245 

Infelix  vates,  rumpitque  hanc  pectore  vocem  : 

*'  Bellum  etiam  pro  caede  boum  stratisque  juvencis, 

"  Laomedontiadae,  bellumne  inferre  paratis, 

'*  Et  patrio  Harpyias  insontes  pellere  regno  ? 

"  Accipite  ergo  animis  atque  liaec  mea  figite  dicta,      250 

"  Quae  Plioebo  pater  omnipotens,  mibi  Pboebus  ApoUo 

"  Praedixit,  vobis  Furiarum  ego  maxima  pando. 

"  Italiam  cursu  petitis :  ventisque  vocatis 

*'  Ibitis  Italiam,  portusque  intrare  licebit ; 

*'  Sed  non  ante  datam  cingetis  moenibus  urbem,  255 

"  Quam  vos  dira  fames  nostraeque  injuria  caedis 

"  Ambesas  subigat  malis  absumere  mensas.'' 

Dixit,  et  in  silvam  pcnnis  ablata  refugit. 

At  sociis  subita  gelidus  formidine  sanguis 


58  AENEIDOS    LIB.    III. 

Derigiiit,  cecidere  animi ;  nec  jam  amplius  armis,        260 

Sed  votis  precibusque  jubcnt  exposcere  pacem, 

Sive  deae,  seu  sint  dirae  obscenaeque  volucres  ; 

Et  pater  Ancliises  passis  de  litore  palmis 

Numina  magna  vocat,  meritosque  indicit  lionores  : 

"  Di,  proliibete  minas  ;  di,  talem  avertite  casum,         2(55 

'^  Et  placidi  servate  pios  ! ";  tum  litore  funem 

Deripere,  excussosque  jubet  laxare  rudentes. 

Tendunt  vela  Noti :  fugimus  spumantibus  undis, 
Qua  cursum  ventusque  gubernatorque  vocabat. 
Jam  medio  apparet  flucfru  nemorosa  Zacyntbos,  270 

Dulicbiumque,  Sameque,  et  Neritos  ardua  saxis. 
Effugimus  scopulos  Ithacac,  Laertia  regna, 
Et  terram  altricem  saevi  exsecramur  Ulixi. 
Mox  et  Leucatae  nimbosa  cacumina  montis, 
Et  formidatus  nautis  apcritur  Apollo.  275 

Hunc  petimus  fessi,  et  parvae  succedimus  urbi ; 
Ancora  de  prora  jacitur,  stant  litore  puppes. 
Ergo  insperata  tandem  tellure  potiti, 
Lustraraurque  Jovi,  votisque  incendimus  aras, 
Actiaque  Iliacis  celebramus  litora  ludis.  280 

Exercent  patrias  oleo  labente  palaestras 
Nudati  socii :  juvat  evasisse  tot  urbes 
Argolicas,  mediosque  fugam  tenuisse  per  hostes. 
Interea  magnum  sol  circumvolvitur  annum, 
Et  glacialis  biems  aquilonibus  asperat  undas.  285 

Acre  cavo  clipcum,  magni  gestamen  Abantis, 
Postibus  adversis  figo  ct  rem  carmine  signo  : 
"  Aeneas  liaec  dc  Danais  victorihus  arma" ; 
Linqucre  tum  portus  jubeo  et  considere  transtris. 

Ccrtatim  socii  feriunt  mare  et  aequora  verrunt.       290 
Protenus  aerias  Phaeacum  abscondimus  arces, 
Litoraque  Epiri  legimus,  portuque  subimus 
Cbaonio  et  celsam  Butliroti  acccdimus  urbem. 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    III.  59 

Hic  incredibilis  rerum  fama  occupat  aures, 
Priamiden  Helenum  Graias  regnare  per  urbes,  295 

Conjugio  Aeacidae  Pyrrlii  sceptrisque  potitum, 
Et  patrio  Andromachen  iterum  cessisse  marito. 
Obstupui,  miroque  incensum  pectus  amore, 
Compellare  virum  et  casus  cognoscere  tantos. 
Progredior  portu,  classes  et  litora  linquens,  300 

Solemnes  quum  forte  dapes  et  tristia  dona 
Ante  urbem  in  luco  falsi  Simoentis  ad  undam 
Libabat  cineri  Andromacbe,  Manesque  vocabat 
Hectoreum  ad  tumulum,  viridi  quem  cespite  inanem 
Et  geminas,  causam  lacrimis,  sacraverat  aras.  305 

Ut  me  conspexit  venientem  et  Troia  circum 
Arma  amens  vidit ;  magnis  exterrita  monstris 
Deriguit  visu  in  medio,  calor  ossa  reliquit, 
Labitur,  et  longo  vix  tandem  tempore  fatur : 
"  Verane  te  facies,  verus  mibi  nuntius  affers,  310 

"  Nate  dea  ?  vivisne  ?  aut,  si  lux  alma  recessit, 
"  Hector  ubi  est  ?  "    Dixit,  lacrimasque  effudit  et  omnem 
Implevit  clamore  locum.     Vix  pauca  furenti 
Subjicio  et  raris  turbatus  vocibus  hisco  : 
'  Vivo  equidem,  vitamque  extrema  per  omnia  duco.    315 
'  Ne  dubita :  nam  vera  vides. 
'  Heu,  quis  te  casus  dejectam  conjuge  tanto 
'  Excipit,  aut  quae  digna  satis  fortuna  revisit  ? 
'  Hectoris  Andromache  Pyrrhin'  connubia  servas  ?  " 
Dejecit  vultum  et  demissa  voce  locuta  est ;  320 

'  O  felix  una  ante  alias  Priameia  virgo, 
'  Hostilem  ad  tumulum  Trojae  sub  moenibus  altis 
'  Jussa  mori,  quae  sortitus  non  pertulit  ullos, 
'  Nec  victoris  hori  tetigit  captiva  cubile  ! 
'  Nos,  patria  incensa,  diversa  per  aequora  vectae,        325 
'  Stirpis  Achilleae  fastus  juvenemque  superbum, 
'  Servirio  enixae,  tulimus.     Qni  deinde,  secutus 


60  AENEIDOS    LIB.    III. 

"  Ledaeam  Herinionen  Lacedaemoniosque  hymenaeos, 

"  Me  famulo  famulamque  Heleno  transmisit  liabendam. 

"  Ast  illum,  ereptae  magno  inflammatus  amorc  330 

"  Conjugis  et  scelerum  Furiis  agitatus,  Orestes 

"  Excipit  incautum,  patriasque  obtruncat  ad  aras. 

"  Morte  Neoptolemi  regnorum  reddita  cessit 

"  Pars  Heleno,  qui  Chaonios  cognomine  campos, 

"  Chaoniamque  omnem  Trojano  a  Chaone  dixit,  335 

ii  Pergamaque  Iliacamque  jugis  hanc  addidit  arcem, 

"  Sed  tibi  qui  cursum  venti,  quae  fata  dedere, 

"  Aut  quisnam  ignarum  nostris  deus  appuht  oris  ? 

"  Quid  puer  Ascanius  ?     Superatne  ?  et  vescitur  aura, 

"  Quae  tibi  jam  Troja.....?  340 

"  Ecqua  tamen  puero  est  amissae  cura  parentis  ? 

*'  Ecquid  in  antiquam  virtutem  animosque  viriles 

"  Et  pater  Aeneas  et  avuncuius  excitat  Hector  ?  " 

Talia  fundebat  lacrimans  longosque  ciebat 

Incassum  fletus,  quum  sese  a  moenibus  heros  345 

Priamides  multis  Helenus  comitantibus  afFert, 

Agnoscitque  suos,  laetusque  ad  limina  ducit, 

Et  multum  lacrimas  verba  inter  singula  fundit. 

Procedo,  et  parvam  Trojam  simulataque  magnis 

Pergama  et  arentem  Xanthi  cognomine  rivum  350 

Agnosco,  Scaeaeque  amplector  limina  portae. 

Ncc  non  et  Teucri  socia  simul  urbe  fruuntur ; 

Illos  porticibus  rex  accipiebat  in  amplis  ; 

Aulai  MKxlio  libabant  pocula  Bacchi, 

Imposilis  auro  dapibus,  patcrasque  tenebant.  355 

Jamque  dies  alterque  dies  processit,  ct  aurae 
Vela  vocant,  tumidoque  inflatur  carbasus  austro  : 
His  vatem  aggredior  dictis  ac  talia  quaeso : 
"  Trojugena,  interpres  divum,  qui  iiumina  Phoebi, 
"  Qui  tripodas,  Clarii  laurus,  qui  sidera  scntis  360 

'■  Et  vohicrum  linguas  et  ]>raepetis  omina  pennae, 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    III.  61 

"  Fare  age-namque  omnem  cursum  milii  prospera  dixit 

"  Eeligio,  et  cuncti  suaserunt  numine  divi 

"  Italiam  petere  et  terras  tentare  repostas  : 

"  Sola  novum,  dictuque  nefas,  Harpyia  Celaeno  365 

"  Prodigium  canit,  et  tristes  denuntiat  iras 

"  Obscenamque  famem-quae  prima  pericula  vito, 

'■  Quidve  sequens  tantos  possim  superare  labores  .^  " 

Hic  Helenus,  caesis  primum  de  more  juvencis, 

Exorat  pacem  divum,  vittasque  resolvit  370 

Sacrati  capitis,  meque  ad  tua  limina,  Phoebe, 

Ipse  manu  multo  suspensum  numine  ducit ; 

Atque  haec  deinde  canit  divino  ex  ore  sacerdos  : 

"  Nate  dea-nam  te  majoribus  ire  per  altum 

"  Auspiciis  manifesta  fides  :  sic  fata  deum  rex  375 

"  Sortitur,  volvitque  vices  ;  is  vertitur  ordo-, 

"  Pauca  tibi  e  multis,  quo  tutior  hospita  lustres 

"  Aequora  et  Ausonio  possis  considere  portu, 

"  Expediam  dictis :  prohibent  nam  cetera  Parcae 

"  Scire  Helenum  farique  vetat  Satumia  Juno.  380 

"  Principio  Italiam,  quam  tu  jam  rere  propinquam, 

"  Vicinosque,  ignare,  paras  invadere  portus, 

"'  Longa  procul  longis  via  dividit  iuvia  terris : 

"  Ante  et  Tiinacria  lentaudus  remus  in  unda, 

"  Et  salis  Ausonii  lustrandum  navibus  aequor,  ,  385 

"  Infernique  lacus  Aeaeaeque  insula  Circae, 

"  Quam  tuta  possis  urbem  componere  terra. 

"  Signa  tibi  dicam :  tu  condita  mente  teneto. 

"  Quum  tibi  sollicito  secreti  ad  flumiuis  undam 

"  Litoreis  ingens  inventa  sub  ilicibus  sus,  390 

"  Triginta  capitum  fetus  enixa,  jacebit, 

"  Alba,  solo  recubans,  albi  circum  ubera  nati ; 

"  Is  locus  urbis  erit,  requies  ea  certa  laborum. 

"  Nec  tu  mensarum  morsus  horresce  futuros  : 

"  Fata  viam  invenient,  adoritque  vocatus  Apollo.         395 


62  AENEIDOS   LIB,    III. 

"  Has  autem  terras  Italique  lianc  litoris  pram, 

"  Proxima  quae  nostri  perfunditur  aequoris  aestu, 

"  EfFujrc  :  cuncta  malis  habitantur  moenia  Graiis. 

"  Hic  et  Narycii  posuerunt  moenia  Locri, 

"Et  Sallentinos  obsedit  milite  campos  400 

"  Lyctius  Idomeneus ;  hic  illa  ducis  Meliboei 

"  Parva  Philoctetae  subnixa  Petelia  muro. 

"  Quin  ubi  transmissae  steterint  trans  aequora  classes, 

"  Et  positis  aris  jam  vota  in  litore  solves  ; 

"  Purpureo  velare  comas  adopertus  amictu,  405 

"  Ne  qua  inter  sanctos  ignes  in  honore  deorum 

"  Hostilis  facies  occurrat  et  omina  turbet. 

"  Hunc  socii  morem  sacrorum,  hunc  ipse  teneto  ; 

"  Hac  casti  maneant  in  religione  nepotes. 

"  Ast  ubi  digressum  Siculae  te  admoverit  orae  410 

"Ventus,  et  angusti  rarescent  claustra  Pelori; 

"  Laeva  tibi  tellus  et  longo  laeva  petantur 

"  Aequora  circuitu,  dextrum  fuge  litus  et  undas. 

''  Haec  loca  vi  quondam  et  vasta  convulsa  ruina- 

"  Tantum  aevi  longinqua  valet  mutare  vetustas-  415 

"  Dissiluisse  ferunt,  quum  protenus  utraque  tellus 

"  Una  foret ;  venit  medio  vi  pontus,  et  undis 

"  Hesperium  Siculo  latus  abscidit,  arvaque  et  urbes 

"  Litore  diductas  angusto  interluit  aestu. 

"  Dextrum  Scylla  latus,  laevum  implacata  Charybdis  420 

"  Obsidet,  atque  imo  barathri  ter  gurgite  vastos 

"  Sorbct  in  abruptum  fiuctus,  rursusque  sub  auras 

"  Erigit  alternos  et  sidera  verberat  unda. 

"  At  Scyllam  caecis  cohibet  spelunca  latebris, 

"  Ora  exsertantem  et  naves  iu  saxa  trahcntem  :  425 

"  Prima  hominis  facies  et  pulchro  pcctore  virgo 

"  Pube  tenus  ;  postrema  immani  corpore  pistrix, 

"  Delphinum  caudas  utero  commissa  luporum. 

"  Praestat  Trinacrii  metas  histrare  Pachyni 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    III.  63 

"  Cessantem,  longos  et  cii:cumflectere  cursus,  430 

"  Quam  semel  informem  vasto  vidisse  sub  antro 

"  Scyllam  et  caeruleis  canibus  resonantia  saxa. 

"  Praeterea,  si  qua  est  Heleno  prudentia,  vati 

*'  Si  qua  fides,  animum  si  veris  implet  Apollo, 

"  Unum  illud  tibi,  nate  dea,  proque  omnibus  unum      435 

"  Praedicam  ct  rej^etens  iterumque  iterumque  monebo : 

*•  Junonis  magnae  primum  prece  numen  adora ; 

"  Junoni  cane  vota  libens,  dominamque  potentem 

"  Supplicibus  supera  donis  :  sic  denique  victor 

"  Trinacria  fines  Italos  mittere  relicta.  440 

"  Huc  ubi  delatus  Cumaeam  accesseris  urbem 

"  Divinosque  lacus  et  Averna  sonantia  silvis  ; 

"  Insanam  vatem  adspicies,  quae  rupe  sub  ima 

"  Fata  canit,  foliisque  notas  et  nomina  mandat. 

"  Quaecumque  in  foliis  descripsit  carmina  virgo,  445 

'•  Digerit  in  numerum,  atque  antro  seclusa  relinquit ; 

'*  Illa  manent  immota  locis,  neque  ab  ordine  cedunt. 

"  Verum  eadem,  verso  tenuis  quum  cardine  ventus 

"  Impulit  et  teneras  turbavit  janua  frondes, 

"  Numquam  deinde  cavo  volitantia  prendere  saxo,        450 

"  Nec  revocare  situs  aut  jungere  carmina  curat ; 

"  Inconsulti  abeunt,  sedemque  odere  Sibyllae. 

"  Hic  tibi  ne  qua  raorae  fuerint  dispendia  tanti- 

"  Quamvis  increpitent  socii,  et  vi  cursus  in  altum 

'^  Yela  vocet  possisque  sinus  implere  secundos-,  455 

"  Quin  adeas  vatem,  precibusque  oracula  poscas 

"  Ipsa  canat,  vocemque  volens  atque  ora  resolvat. 

"  Illa  tibi  Italiae  populos  venturaque  bella, 

"  Et  quo  quemque  modo  fugiasque  ferasque  laborem, 

"  Expediet,  cursusque  dabit  vcnerata  secundos.  460 

**  Haec  sunt,  quae  nostra  liceat  te  voce  moneri. 

"  Vade  age,  et  ingentem  factis  fer  ad  aethera  Trojam." 

Quae  postquam  vates  sic  ore  efi^atus  amico  est, 


64  AENEIDOS   LIB.    III. 

Uona  dehinc  auro  gravia  sectoque  eleplianto 

Imperat  ad  naves  ferri,  stipatque  carinis  465 

Ingens  argcntum  Dudonaeosque  lebetas, 

Loricam  consertam  hamis  auroque  trilicem, 

Et  conum  insignis  galeae  cristasque  comantes, 

Arma  Neoptolemi.     Sunt  et  sua  dona  parenti. 

Addit  equos,  additque  duces  ;  470 

Kemigium  supplet ;  socios  simul  instruit  armis. 

Interea  classem  velis  aptare  jubebat 
Ancbises,  fieret  vento  mora  ne  qua  ferenti. 
Quem  Plioebi  interpres  multo  compellat  honore  : 
"  Conjugio  Anchisa  Veneris  dignate  superbo,  475 

"  Cura  deum,  bis  Pergameis  erepte  ruinis, 
"  Ecce  tibi  Ausoniae  tellus  :  hanc  arripe  velis. 
"  Et  tamen  hanc  pelago  praeterlabare  necesse  est : 
"  Ausoniae  pars  illa  procul,  quam  pandit  Apollo. 
"  Vadc,''  ait  "  o  felix  nati  pietate  !     Quid  ultra  480 

"  Provehor,  et  fando  surgentes  demoror  austros  ?  " 
Nec  niinus  Andromache,  digrcssu  maesta  supremo, 
Fert  picturatas  auri  subtcmine  vcstes 
Et  Phrygiam  Ascanio  chhimydem,  nec  cedit  honori, 
Textilibusque  oncrat  donis,  ac  talia  fatur  :  485 

"  Accipe  et  haec,  manuum  tibi  quae  mouumenta  mearum 
"  Sint,  puer,  et  longum  Androiuachae  testentur  amorem, 
"  Conjugis  Hectoreae,  cape  dona  extrema  tuorum, 
"  0  mihi  sola  mci  super  Astyanacfcis  imago. 
"  Sic  oculos,  sic  ille  manus,  sic  ora  fcrebat,  490 

"  Et  nunc  aequali  tecum  pubesceret  aevo." 
Hos  ego  digrediens  lacrimis  afFabar  obortis : 
*'  Vivite  felices,  quibus  est  fortuna  peracta 
"  Jam  sua  !  Ncs  alia  ex  aliis  in  fata  vocamur ; 
"  Vobis  parta  quics :  nulhini  maris  aequor  arandum,    495 
"  Arva  ncque  Ausoniae  semper  ccdontia  retro 
"  Quaerenda  ;  enigiem  Xanthi  Trojamque  videtis. 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    III.  65 

"  Quam  vestrae  fecere  manus, — melioribus,  opto, 

"  Ausi^iciis,  et  quae  fuerit  minus  obvia  Graiis. 

"  Si  quando  Thybrim  vicinaque  Thybridis  arva  500 

"  Intraro,  gentique  meae  data  moenia  cernam  ; 

"  Cognatas  urbes  olim  populosque  propinquos, 

"  Epiro,  Hesperia,  quibus  idem  Dardanus  auctor 

"  Atque  idem  casus,  unam  faciemus  utramque 

"  Trojam  animis :  maneat  nostros  ea  cura  nepotes."      505 

Provehimur  pelago  vicina  Ceraunia  juxta, 
Unde  iter  Italiam  cursusque  brevissimus  undis. 
Sol  ruit  interea  et  montes  umbrantur  opaci. 
Sternimur  optatae  gremio  telluris  ad  undam, 
Sortiti  remos,  passimque  in  litore  sicco  510 

Corpora  curamjus  ;  fessos  sopor  irrigat  artus. 
Necdum  orbem  medium  nox  horis  acta  subibat : 
Haud  segnis  strato  surgit  Palinurus,  et  omnes 
Explorat  ventos,  atque  auribus  aera  captat ; 
Sidera  cuncta  notat  tacito  labentia  coelo,  515 

Arcturum  pluviasque  Hyadas  geminosque  Triones, 
Armatumque  auro  circumspicit  Oriona.  ,    , 

Postquam  cuncta  videt  coelo  constare  sereno, 
Dat  clarum  e  puppi  signum ;  nos  castra  movemus, 
Tentamusque  viam  et  velorum  pandimus  alas.  520 

Jamque  rubescebat  stellis  Aurora  fugatis, 
Quum  procul  obscuros  colles  humilemque  videmus 
Italiam.     Italiam  primus  conclamat  Achates, 
Italiam  laeto  socii  clamore  salutant, 

Tum  pater  Anchises  magnum  cratera  corona  525 

Induit  implevitque  mero,  divosque  vocavit 
Stans  celsa  in  puppi : 

"  Di,  maris  et  terrae  tempestatumque  potentes, 
"  Ferte  viam  vento  facilcm,  et  spirate  secundi." 
Crebrescunt  optatae  aurae,  portusquc  patescit  530 

Jam  propior,  templumque  apparet  in  arcc  Minervae. 


66  AENEIDOS   LIB.    III. 

Vela  leguat  socli,  et  proras  ad  litora  torquent. 

Portus  ab  Euroo  fluctu  curvatus  in  arcum  : 

Objectae  salsa  simmant  adspargine  cautcs, 

Ipse  latet,  gomino  demittunt  bracliia  muro  535 

Turriti  scopuli,  refugitque  ab  litore  templum. 

Quatuor  hic,  primum  omen,  equos  in  gramine  vidi 

Tondentes  campum  late,  candore  nivali. 

Et  pater  Ancliises  :  "  Bellum,  o  terra  hospita,  portas  : 

**  Bello  armantur  equi,  bellum  haec  armenta  minantur.  540 

"  Sed  tamen  idem  olim  curru  succedere  sueti 

"  Quadrupedes,  et  frena  jugo  concordia  ferre, 

*'  Spes  et  pacis,"  ait.     Tum  numina  sancta  precamur 

Palladis  armisonae,  quae  prima  accepit  ovantes, 

Et  capita  ante  aras  Phrygio  velamur  amictu  ;  545 

Praeceptisque  Heleni,  dederat  quae  masima,  rite 

Junoni  Argivae  jussos  adolemus  honores.  * 

Haud  mora  :  continuo  perfectis  ordine  votis, 

Cornua  velatarum  obvertimus  antennarum, 

Grajugeniimque  domos  suspectaque  linquimus  avva.     550 

Hinc  sinus  Horculei,  si  vera  est  fama,  Tarenti 

Cernitur  ;  attoUit  se  diva  Lacinia  contra, 

Caulonisque  arces  et  navifragum  Scylaceum. 

Tum  procul  e  fluctu  Trinacria  cernitur  Aetna  ; 

Et  gomitum  ingentcm  jielagi  pulsataque  saxa  555 

Audimus  longe,  fractasque  ad  litora  voces  ; 

Exsultantque  vada,  atque  aestu  miscentur  arenae. 

Et  pater  Anchises  :  "  Nimirum  hacc  illa  Charybdis ; 

"  Hos  Helenus  scopulos,  haec  saxa  horrenda  cancbat  : 

"  Eripite,  o  socii,  pariterque  insurgite  remis  !  "  560 

Haud  minus  ac  jussi  faciunt ;  primusque  rudentem 

Contorsit  laevas  proram  Palinurus  ad  undas  ; 

Laevam  cuncta  cohors  rcmis  vcntisquc  petivit. 

Tollimur  in  coclum  curvato  gurgitc,  et  idcm 

Subducta  ad  Manes  imos  dosediinus  unda  ;  565 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    III.  67 

Ter  scopuli  clamorem  inter  cava  saxa  dedere, 
Ter  spumam  elisam  et  rorantia  vidunus  astra. 
Interea  fessos  ventus  cum  sole  reliquit, 
Ignarique  viae  Cyclopum  aUabimur  oris. 
Portus  ab  accessu  ventorum  immotus  et  ingens  5*70 

Ipse ;  sed  liorrificis  juxta  tonat  Aetna  ruinis  : 
Interdumque  atram  prorumpit  ad  aethcra  nubem, 
Turbine  fumantem  piceo  et  candente  favilla, 
AttoUitque  globos  flammarum,  et  sidera  lambit ; 
Interdum  scopulos  aviilsaque  viscera  montis  575 

Erigit  eructans,  liquefactaque  saxa  sub  auras 
Cum  gemitu  glomerat,  fundoque  exaestuat  imo. 
Fama  est,  Enceladi  semiustum  fulmine  corpus 
Urgeri  mole  hac,  ingentemque  insuper  Aetnam 
Impositam  ruptis  flammam  exspirare  caminis,  580 

Et,  fessum  quoties  mutet  latus,  intremere  omnem 
Murmure  Trinacriam  et  coelum  subtexere  fumo. 

Noctem  illam  tecti  silvis  immania  monstra 
Perferimus,  nec,  quae  sonitum  det  causa,  videmus : 
Nam  neque  erant  astrorum  ignes,  nec  lucidus  aethra    585 
Siderea  polus,  obscuro  sed  nubila  coelo, 
Et  lunam  in  nimbo  nox  intempesta  tenebat. 
Postera  jamque  dies  primo  surgebat  Eoo, 
Humentemque  Aurora  polo  dimoverat  umbram : 
Quum  subito  e  silvis,  macie  confecta  suprema,  590 

Ignoti  nova  forma  viri  miserandaque  cultu 
Procedit,  supplexque  manus  ad  litora  tendit. 
Eespicimus.     Dira  illuvies  immissaque  barba, 
Consertum  tegumen  spinis  ;  at  cetera  Graius 
Et  quondam  patriis  ad  Trojam  missus  in  armis.  595 

tsque  ubi  Dardanios  habitus  et  Troia  vidit 
Arma  procul :  paullum  adspectu  conterritus  haesit, 
Continuitque  gradum  ;  mox  scse  ad  litora  praeceps 
Cum  fletu  prccibusque  tulit :  "  Per  sidcra  testor, 


68  AENEIDOS   LIB.   III. 

"  Per  suiDeros  atque  hoc  coeli  spirabile  lumen,  600 

"  ToUite  me,  Tcucri  !  (luascumque  abducite  terras : 

"  Hoc  sat  erit.     Scio  me  Danais  e  classibus  unum, 

"  Et  bello  Iliacos  fateor  petiisse  Penates. 

"  Pro  quo,  si  sceleris  tanta  est  injuria  nostri, 

"  Spargite  me  in  fluctus  vastoque  immergite  ponto  :    605 

"  Si  pereo,  hominum  manibus  periisse  juvabit." 

Dixerat,  et  genua  amplexus  genibusque  volutans 

Haerebat.     Qui  sit,  fari,  quo  sanguine  cretus, 

Hortamur ;  quae  cleinde  agitet  fortuna  fateri. 

Ipse  pater  dextram  Ancbises,  haud  multa  moratus,      610 

Dat  juveni,  atque  animum  praesenti  pignore  firmat. 

Ille  haec,  deposita  tandem  formidine,  fatur  : 

"  Sum  patria  ex  Ithaca,  comes  infelicis  TJlixi, 

"  Nomen  Achemenides,  Trojam,  genitore  Adamasto 

"  Paupere-mansissetque  utinam  fortuna  !-,  profectus.  615 

"  Hic  me,  dum  trepidi  crudelia  limina  linquunt, 

"  Immemores  socii  vasto  Cyclopis  in  antro 

"  Deseruere.     Domus  sanie  dapibusque  cruentis, 

"  Intus  opaca,  ingens.     Ipse  arduus,  altaque  pulsat 

"  Sidera-di,  talcm  terris  avertite  pestem  !-  620 

"  Nec  visu  facilis  nec  dictu  affabilis  ulli. 

"  Visceribus  miserorum  et  sanguine  vescitur  atro. 

"  Vidi  egomet,  duo  de  numero  quum  corpora  nostro 

'^  Prensa  manu  magna  medio  resupinus  in  antro 

"  Fraugeret  ad  saxum,  sanieque  exspersa  natarent       625 

"  Limiua  ;  vidi,  atro  quum  membra  fluentia  tabo 

"  Manderet,  et  tepidi  tremerent  sub  dentibus  artus. 

"  Haud  impune  quidem;  nec  talia  passus  Ulixes, 

"  Oblitusve  sui  est  Ithacus  discrimine  tanto. 

"  Nam  simul,  expletus  dapibus  vinoque  scpultus,         630 

"  Cervicem  inflexam  posuit,  jacuitque  per  antrum 

"  Immensus,  saniem  eructans  et  frusta  cruento 

■'  Per  somnum  commixta  mcro  :  nos,  magna  precati 


AENEIDOS    LIB,    III.  69 

"  Numina  sortitique  vices,  una  undique  circum 

"  Fundimur,  et  telo  lumen  terebramus  acuto,  635 

"  Ingens,  quod  torva  ,solum  sub  fronte  latebat, 

"  Argolici  clipei  aut  Plioebeae  lampadis  instar, 

"  Et  tandem  laeti  sociorum  ulciscimur  umbras. 

"  Sed  fugite,  o  miseri,  fugite,  atque  ab  litore  funem 

"  Eumpite :  G40 

"  Nam,  qualis  quantusque  cavo  Polyphemus  in  antro 

"  Lanigeras  claudit  pecudes  atque  ubera  pressat, 

"  Centum  alii  curva  haec  habitant  ad  litora  vulgo 

"  Infandi  Cyclopes  et  altis  montibus  errant, 

"  Tertia  jam  Lunae  se  cornua  lumine  complent,  645 

''  Quum  vitam  in  silvis  inter  deserta  ferarum 

"  Lustra  domosque  traho,  vastosque  ab  rupe  Cycloj)as 

"  Prospicio,  sonitumque  j)edum  vocemque  tremisco, 

"  Victum  infelicem,  baccas  lapidosaque  corna, 

"  Dant  rami,  et  vulsis  pascunt  radicibus  herbae.  650 

"  Omnia  collustrans,  hanc  primum  ad  litora  classem 

"  Conspexi  venientem  ;  huic  me,  quaecumque  fuisset, 

"  Addixi :  satis,jest  gentem  effugisse  nefandam. 

"  Vos  animam  hanc  potius  quocumque  absumite  leto." 

Vix  ea  fatus  erat,  summo  quum  monte  videmus  655 

Ipsum  inter  pecudes  vasta  se  mole  moventem 

Pastorem  Polyphemum  et  litora  nota  petentem,         [tum. 

Monstrum  horrendum,  informe,  ingens,  cui  lumen  adem- 

Trunca  manu  pinus  regit  et  vestigia  firmat ; 

Lanigerae  comitantur  oves  :  ea  sola  voluptas,  660 

Solamenque  mali, 

Postquam  altos  tetigit  fluctus  et  ad  aequora  venit ;  * 

Lumiuis  eflfossi  fluidum  lavit  inde  cruorem, 

Dentibus  infrendens  gemitu,  graditurque  per  aequor 

Jam  medium :  necdum  fluctus  latera  ardua  tinxit,       665 

Nos  procul  inde  fugam  trepidi  celerare,  recepto 

Supplice  sic  merito,  tacitique  incidere  funem ; 


70  AENEIDOS    LIB.    III. 

Verrimus  et  proni  certantibus  aequora  remis. 

Sensit  et  ad  sonitum  vocis  vestigia  torsit. 

Verum  ubi  nulla  datur  dextra  alFectare  potestas,  670 

Nec  potis  lonios  fluctus  aequare  sequendo  ; 

Clamorem  immensum  tollit,  quo  pontus  et  omnes 

IiitrcDiuere  undae,  penitusque  exterrita  tellus 

Italiae,  curvisque  immiigiit  Aetna  cavernis. 

At  gcnus  e  silvis  Cyclopum  et  montibus  altis  675 

Excitum  ruit  ad  portus,  et  litora  complent. 

Cernimus  adstantes  nequidquam  lumine  torvo 

Aetnaeos  fratres,  coelo  capita  alta  ferentes, 

Concilium  horrendum :  quales  quum  vertice  celso 

Aeriae  quercus  aut  coniferae  cyparissi  680 

Constiterunt,  sih  a  alta  Jovis  lucusve  Dianae. 
Praecipites  metus  acer  agit,  quocumque  rudentes 

Excutere  et  ventis  intendere  vela  secundis ; 
[Contra  jussa  monent  Heleni,  Scyllam  atque  Charybdim] 
[Intcr  utramque  viam  leti  discrimine  parvo,]  685 

[Ni  teneant  cursus,     Certum  est  dare  lintea  retro.] 
Ecce  autem  Boreas  angusta  ab  sede  Pelorir 
Missus  adest.     Vivo  praetervehor  ostia  saxo 
Pantagiae  Megarosque  sinus  Thapsumque  jacentem. 
Talia  monstrabat  relegens  errata  retrorsus  690 

Litora  Achemenides,  comes  infelicis  Ulixi. 

Sicanio  praetenta  sinu  jacet  insula  contra 
Plemyrium  undosum  ;  nomen  dixere  priores 
Ortygiam.     Alpheum  fama  est  huc  Elidis  amnem 
Occultas  egissG  vias  subter  mare,  qui  nunc  695 

Ore,  Arethusa,  tuo  Siculis  coufunditur  undis. 
Jussi  numina  magna  loci  vcneramur,  et  inde 
Exsupero  praepingue  solum  stagnantis  Hclori. 
Hinc  altas  cautes  projcctaquc  saxa  Pachyni 
Radimus  ;  et  fatis  numquam  concessa  moveri  700 

Apparet  Camarina  procul,  campique  Geloi, 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    III,  7l 

Immanisque  Gela  fluvii  cognomine  dicta. 

Arduus  inde  Acragas  ostentat  maxima  lono-e 

Moenia,  magnanimum  quondam  generator  equorum ; 

Teque  datis  linquo  ventis,  palmosa  Selinus,  705 

Et  vada  dura  lego  saxis  Lilybeia  caecis. 

Hinc  Drepani  me  portus  et  illaetabilis  ora 

Accipit.     Hic,  pelagi  tot  tempestatibus  actus, 

Heu  genitorem,  omnis  curae  casusque  levamen, 

Amitto  Ancliisen.     Hic  me,  pater  optime,  fessum        710 

Deseris,  heu,  tantis  nequidquam  erepte  periclis  ! 

Nec  vates  Helenus,  quum  multa  liorrenda  moneret,     ' 

Hos  mihi  praedixit  luctus,  non  dira  Celaeno. 

Hic  labor  extremus,  longarum  liaec  meta  viarum. 

Hinc  me  digressum  vestris  deus  appulit  oris."  715 

Sic  pater  Aeneas  intentis  omnibus  unus 
Fata  renarrabat  divum,  cursusque*  docebat. 
Conticuit  tandem,  factoque  hic  fine  quievit. 


P.  VIRGILII  MARONIS 

AENEIDOS 

LIBER  QUARTUS. 


At  regina  gravi  jam  dudum  saucia  cura 
Vulnus  alit  venis,  et  caeco  carpitur  igni, 
Multa  viri  virtus  animo,  multusque  recursat 
Gentis  honos  ;  haerent  infixi  pectore  vultus 
Verbaque,  nec  placidam  membris  dat  cura  quietem. 
Postera  Phoebea  lustrabat  lampade  terras 
Humentemque  Aurora  polo  dimoverat  umbram, 
Quum  sic  unanimam  alloquitur  male  sana  sororem : 
"  Anna  soror,  quae  me  suspensam  insomnia  terrent  ? 
"  Quis  novus  hic  nostris  successit  sedibus  hospes  ? 
"  Quem  sese  ore  ferens  !  quam  forti  pectore  et  armis  ! 
"  Credo  equidem,  nec  vana  fides,  genus  esse  deorilm : 
"  Degeneres  animos  timor  arguit.     Heu,  quibus  ille 
"  Jactatus  fiitis  !  quac  bella  exhausta  canebat  ! 
"•Si  mihi  non  animo  fixum  immotumquc  sedcret, 
"  Ne  cui  me  vinclo  velleui  sociare  jugali, 
"  Postquam  primus  amor  deceptam  morte  fefellit ; 
"  Si  non  pertaesum  thalami  tacdaeqiie  fuisset, 
"  Huic  uni  forsan  potui  succumbere  culpac. 
"  Anna-fatebor  enim-,  miscri  post  fata  Sychaei 
"  Conjugis  et  sparsos  fraterna  caede  Pcnates, 


15 


20 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    IV.  73 

"  Solus  liic  inflexit  sensus,  animumque  labantem 
"  Impulit :  agnosco  veteris  vestigia  flammae. 
"  Sed  milii  vel  tellus  optem  prius  ima  deliiscat, 
"  Vel  pater  omnipotens  adigat  me  fulmine  ad  umbras,  25 
"  Pallentes  umbras  Erebi  noctemque  profundam, 
"  Ante,  Pudor,  quam  te  violo  aut  tua  jura  resolvo. 
"  IUe  meos,  primus  qui  me  sibi  junxit,  amores 
"  Abstulit :  ille  babeat  secum  servetque  sepulcro." 
Sic  effata,  sinum  lacrimis  implevit  obortis.  30 

Anna  refert :  "  0  luce  magis  dilecta  sorori, 
"  Solane  perpetua  maerens  carpere  juventa, 
"  ISFec  dulces  natos,  Yeneris  nec  praemia  noiis  ? 
"  Id  cinerem  aut  Manes  credis  curare  sepultos  ? 
"  Esto :  aegram  nuUi  quondam  flexere  mariti,  35 

"  Non  Libyae,  non  ante  Tyro ;  despectus  larbas 
"  Ductoresque  alii,  quos  Africa  terra  triumpbis 
"  Dives  alit :  placitone  etiam  pugnabis  amori  ? 
"  Nec  venit  in  mentem,  quorum  consederis  arvis  ? 
"  Hinc  Gaetulae  urbes,  genus  insuperabile  bello,  40 

"  Et  Numidae  infreni  cingunt  ct  inhospita  Syrtis  ; 
"  Hinc  deserta  siti  regio,  lateque  furentes 
"  Barcaei.     Quid  bella  Tyro  surgentia  dicam, 
"  Germanique  minas  ? 

"  Dis  equidem  auspicibus  reor  et  Junone  secunda  45 

"  Hunc  cursum  Iliacas  vento  tenuisse  carinas. 
"  Quam  tu  urbem,  soror,  banc  cernes,  quae  surgere  regua 
"  Conjugio  tali !     Teucriim  comitantibus  armis, 
"  Punica  se  quantis  attoUet  gloria  rebus ! 
"  Tu  modo  posce  deos  veniam,  sacrisque  litatis  50 

"  Indulge  hospitio,  causasque  innecte  morandi, 
"  Dum  pelago  desaevit  hiems  et  aquosus  Onon, 
"  Quassataeque  rates,  dum  non  tractabile  coelum." 
His  dictis  incensum  animum  inflammavit  amore, 
Spemque  dedit  dubiae  menti,  solvitque  pudorem.  55 

4 


74  AENEIDOS   LIB.   IV. 

Principio  delubra  adeunt,  pacemque  per  aras 

Exquirunt ;  mactant  lectas  de  more  bidentes 

Legiferae  Cereri  Phoeboque  patrique  Lyaeo, 

Junoni  ante  omneSj  cui  viucla  jugalia  curae. 

Ipsa  tenens  dextra  pateram  pulcherrima  Dido  60 

Candentis  vaccae  media  inter  cornua  fundit, 

Aut  ante  ora  deum  pingues  spatiatur  ad  aras, 

Instauratque  diem  donis,  pecudumque  reclusis 

Pectoribus  inhians  spirantia  consulit  exta. 

Heu  vatum  ignarae  mentes  !  quid  vota  furentem,  65 

Quid  delubra  juvant  ?     Est  mollis  flamma  medullas 

Interea,  et  tacitum  vivit  sub  pectore  vulnus. 

Uritur  infelix  Dido  totaque  vagatur 

Urbe  furens,  qualis  conjecta  cerva  sagitta, 

Quam  procul  incautam  nemora  inter  Cresia  iixit  70 

Pastor  agens  telis,  liquitque  volatile  ferrum 

Nescius ;  illa  fuga  silvas  saltusque  peragrat 

Dictaeos,  haeret  lateri  letalis  arundo. 

Nunc  media  Aenean  secum  per  moenia  ducit, 

Sidoniasque  ostentat  opes  urbemque  paratam,  75 

Incipit  eifari  mediaquc  in  voce  resistit ; 

Nunc  eadem  labente  die  convivia  quaerit, 

Uiacosque  iterum  demens  audire  Labores 

Exposcit,  pendetque  iterum  narrantis  ab  ore. 

Post,  ubi  digressi,  lumenque  obscura  vicissim  80 

Luna  premit  suadentque  cadentia  sidera  somnos, 

SoLa  domo  maeret  vacua,  stratisque  relictis 

Incubat.     Illum  abscns  absentem  auditque  videtque ; 

Aut  gremio  Ascanium,  genitoris  imagiae  capta, 

Detinet,  infandum  si  fallere  possit  amorem.  85 

Non  coeptae  assurgunt  turrcs,  non  arma  juventus 

Exercet,  portusvc  aut  propugnacula  beUo 

Tuta  parant ;  pendent  opera  intcrnipta  minaeque 

Murorum  ingentes  acquataque  machina  coelo. 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    IV.  75 

Quam  simul  ac  tali  persensit  peste  teneri  90 

Cara  Jovis  conjux,  nec  famam  obstare  furori ; 
Talibus  afforreditur  Venerem  Saturnia  dictis  : 
"  Egregiam  vero  laudem  et  spolia  ampla  refertis 
"  Tucj[ue  puerque  tuus ;  magnum  et  memorabile  numen 
"  Una  dolo  divum  si  femina  victa  duorum  est.  95 

"  Nec  me  adeo  fallit,  veritam  te  moenia  nostra, 
"  Suspectas  habuisse  domos  Carthaginis  altae. 
"  Sed  quis  erit  modus,  aut  quo  nunc  certamine  tanto  ? 
^'  Quin  potius  pacem  aeternam  pactosque  Hymenaeos 
"  Exercemus  ?  Habes,  tota  quod  mente  petisti :  100 

*'  Ardet  amans  Dido  traxitque  per  ossa  furorem. 
"  Communem  liunc  ergo  populum  paribusque  regamus 
"  Auspiciis ;  liceat  Phrygio  servire  marito, 
"  Dotales(][ue  tuae  Tyrios  permittere  dextrae." 
Olli-sensit  enim  simulata  mente  locutam,  105 

Quo  regnum  Italiae  Libycas  averteret  oras- 
Sic  contra  est  ingressa  Venus  :  "  Quis  taiia  demens 
"  Abnuat,  aut  tecum  malit  contendere  bello  ? 
"  Si  modo,  quod  memoras,  factum  fortuna  sequatur. 
^^Sed  fatis  incerta  feror,  si  Jupiter  unam  110 

"  Esse  velit  Tyriis  urbem  Trojaque  profectis, 
"  Miscerive  probet  populos,  aut  foedera  jungi. 
"  Tu  conjux :  tibi  ias  animum  tentare  precando. 
"  Perge  ;  sequar."     Tum  sic  excepit  regia  Juno : 
"  Mecum  erit  iste  labor.  Nunc  qua  ratione,  quod  instat,  115 
"  Confieri  possit,  paucis-adverte-docebo. 
"  Venatum  Aeneas  unaque  miserrima  Dido 
"  In  nemus  ire  parant,  ubi  primos  crastinus  ortus 
"  Extulerit  Titan  radiisque  retexerit  orbem  : 
"  His  ego  nigrantem  commixta  grandine  nimbum,        I2fl 
"  Dum  trepidant  alae  saltusque  iudagine  cingunt, 
"  Desuper  inlimdam,  ct  tonitru  coelum  onme  ciebo. 
"  Diffugieut  comites,  ct  nocte  tegentur  opaca  ; 


76  AENEIDOS    LIB.    IV. 

*  Speluncam  Diclo  dux  et  Trojanus  eandem 
"  Devenient.     Adero  et,  tua  si  mihi  certa  voluntas,      125 
"  Connubio  jungam  stabili  propriamquc  dicabo  : 
"  Hic  Hj-meuaeus  erit."     Non  adversata  petenti 
Annuit,  atque  dolis  risit  Cytherea  repertis. 

Oceanum  interea  surgens  Auron    relinquit. 
It  portis,  jubare  exorto,  delecta  juventus  ;  130 

Retia  rara,  plagae,  lato  venabula  ferro, 
Massylique  ruunt  equites  et  odora  canum  vis. 
Reginam  thalamo  cunctantem  ad  limina  primi 
Poenorum  exspectant ;  ostroque  insignis  et  auro 
Stat  sonipes  ac  frena  ferox  spumantia  mandit.  135 

Tandem  progreditur,  magna  stipante  caterva, 
Sidoniam  picto  chlamydem  circumdata  limbo  : 
Cui  pharetra  ex  auro,  crines  nodantur  in  aurum, 
Aurea  purpuream  subnectit  fibula  vestem. 
Nec  non  et  Phrjgii  comites  et  laetus  lulus  140 

Incedunt ;  ipse  ante  alios  pulcherrimus  omnes 
Infert  se  socium  Aeneas  atque  agmina  jungit. 
Qualis  ubi  hibernam  Lyciam  Xanthique  fluenta 
Deserit  ac  Delum  maternam  invisit  ApoUo, 
Instauratque  choros,  mixtique  altaria  circum  145 

Cretesque  Dryopesque  fremunt  pictique  Agathyrsi ; 
Ipse  jugis  Cyuthi  graditur,  molhque  fluentem 
Fronde  premit  crineni  fingens  atquc  implicat  auro, 
Tehx  sonant  humeris  :  haud  illo  segnior  ibat 
Aencas  ;  tantum  egrcgio  decus  cnitct  ore.  150 

Postquam  altos  ventum  iu  montes  atque  invia  krstra, 
Ecce  ferae,  saxi  dejectae  vertice,  caprae 
Dccurrere  jugis ;  alia  de  parte  patentes 
Transmittunt  cursu  campos  atque  agmina  cervi 
Pulvcrulcnta  fuga  glomerant,  monte.sque  rchnquunt     155 
At  puer  Ascanius  mediis  in  vaUibus  acri 
Gaudet  equo,  jaraque  hos  cursu,  jam  praeterit  illos. 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    IV.  77 

Spumantemque  dari  pecora  inter  inertia  votis 
Optat  aprum,  aut  fulvum  clescenclere  monte  leonem, 
Interea  magno  misceri  murmure  coelum  IGO 

Incipit ;  insequitur  commixta  grandine  nimbus : 
Et  Tjrii  comites  passim  et  Trojana  juventus 
Dardaniusque  nepos  Veneris  diversa  per  agros 
Tecta  metu  petiere  ;  ruunt  de  montibus  amnes. 
Speluncam  Dido  dux  et  Trojanus  eamdem  165 

Deveniunt.     Prima  et  Tellus  et  pronuba  Juno 
Dant  signum  ;  fulsere  ignes  et  conscius  aether 
Connubiis,  summoque  ulularunt  vertice  Nymphae. 
lUe  dies  primus  leti  primusque  malorum 
Causa  fuit :  neque  enim  specie  famave  movetur,  170 

Nec  jam  furtiyum  Dido  meditatur  amorem  ; 
Conjugium  vocat :   hoc  praetexit  nomine  culpam. 
Extemplo  Libyae  magnas  it  Fama  per  urbes, 
Fama  malum,  qua  non  aHud  velocius  uUum 
MobUitate  \^get,  viresque  acquirit  eundo :  175 

Parva  metu  primo,  mox  sese  attoUit  in  auras, 
Ingrediturque  solo  et  caput  iuter  nubila  condit. 
lUam  Terra  parens,  ira  irritata  cleorum, 
Estremam^  ut  perliibent,  Coeo  Enccladoque  sororem 
Progenuit  pedibus  celerem  et  pernicibus  aUs,  180 

Monstrum  horrendum,  ingens,  cui,  quot  sunt  corpore  plu- 
Tot  vigiles  oculi  subter-mirabile  dictu-,  [mae 

Tot  linguae,  totidem  ora  sonant,  tot  subrigit  aures. 
Nocte  volat  coeli  medio  terraeque  per  umbram  • 
Stridens,  nec  dulci  declinat  lumina  somno ;  185 

Luce  sedet  custos  aut  summi  culmine  tecti 
Turribus  aut  altis,  et  magnas  territat  urbes, 
Tam  ficti  pravique  tenax  quam  nuntia  veri. 
Haec  tum  multiplici  populos  sermone  replebat 
Gaudens,  et  pariter  facta  atque  infecta  canebat  :  190 

Venisse  Aenean,  Trojano  sanguine  cretum, 


78  AENEIDOS    LIB.    IV. 

Cui  se  pulchra  viro  dignetur  jungere  Dido  ; 

Nunc  liicmem  inter  se  luxu,  quam  longa,  foverc, 

Kegnorum  immemores  turpique  cupidine  captos. 

Haec  passim  dea  foeda  virum  difiandit  in  ora.  195 

Protenus  ad  regem  cursus  detorquet  larban, 

lucenditque  auimum  dictis  atque  aggerat  iras. 

Hic  Ammone  satus,  rapta  Garamantide  Nympha, 

Templa  Jovi  centum  hitis  immania  regnis 

Centum  aras  posuit ;  vigilemque  sacraverat  ignem,      200 

Excubias  divum  acternas  ;  pecudumque  cruore 

Pingue  solum  et  variis  florentia  limina  sertis. 

Isque  amens  animi  et  rumore  accensus  amaro 

Dicitur  ante  aras  media  inter  numina  divum 

Multa  Jovem  manibus  supplex  orasse  supiuis :  205 

"  Jupiter  omnipotens,  cui  nunc  Maurusia  pictis 

"  Gens  epuhita  toris  Lenaeum  libat  honorem, 

"  Adspicis  haec  ?  an  te,  genitor,  quum  fulmina  torques, 

"  Nequidquam  horremus,  caecique  in  nubibus  ignes 

"  Terrificant  animos  et  inania  murmura  miscent  ?        210 

"  Femina,  quae  nostris  errans  in  finibus  urbem 

"  Exiguam  pretio  posuit,  cui  litus  arandum, 

"  Cuique  loci  leges  dedimus,  connubia  nostra 

"  Kepuht,  ac  dominum  Aenean  in  regna  recepit. 

"  Et  nunc  ille  Paris  cum  semiviro  comitatu,  215 

*'  Maeonia  mentum  mitra  crinemque  madentem 

"  Subnixus,  rapto  potitur ;  nos  munera  templis 

"  Quippe  tuis  fcrimus,  famamque  fovemus  inanem  !  " 

TaUbus  orantcm  dictis  arasque  tenentem 

Audiit  omnipotens,  oculosque  ad  moenia  torsit  220 

Eegia  et  oblitos  famae  mehoris  amantes. 

Tum  sic  Mercurium  alloquitur  ac  taha  mandat : 

"  Vade  age,  nate,  voca  Zephyros  et  hxbere  pennis, 

"  Dardaniumquc  ducem,  Tyria  Carthagine  qui  nunc 

"  ]Lxspectat  fatisque  datas  non  respicit  urbes,  225 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    IV,  79 

'  AUoquere,  et  celeres  defer  mea  dicta  per  auras. 
"  Non  illum  nobis  genetrix  pulciierrima  talem 
'  Promisit,  Graiumque  ideo  bis  vindicat  armis  : 
'  Sed  fore,  qui  gra,vidam  imperiis  belloque  fremeutem 
'  Italiam  regeret,  genus  alto  a  sanguine  Teucri  230 

'  Proderet,  ac  totum  sub  leges  mitteret  orbem. 
'  Si  nulla  accendit  tantarum  gloria  rerum, 
'  Nec  super  ij)se  sua  molitur  laudc  laborem  ; 
^  Ascanione  pater  Komanas  invidet  arces  ? 
'  Quid  struit,  aut  qua  spe  inimica  in  gente  moratur,    235 
'  Nec  prolem  Ausoniam  et  Lavinia  respicit  arva  ? 
'  Naviget !     Haec  summa  est ;  hic  nostri  nuntius  esto." 
Dixerat ;  ille  patris  magni  parere  j)arabat 
Imperio,  et  primum  pedibus  talaria  nectit 
Aurea,  quae  sublimem  alis,  sive  aequora  supra,  240 

Seu  terram,  rapido  pariter  cum  flamine  portant. 
Tum  virgam  capit-hac  animas  ille  evocat  Orco 
Pallentes,  alias  sub  Tartara  tristia  mittit, 
Dat  somnos  adimitque,  et  lumina  morte  resignat-. 
Illa  fretus  agit  ventos,  et  turbida  tranat  245 

Nubila.     Jamque  volans  apicem  et  latera  ardua  cernit 
Atlantis  duri,  coelum  qui  vertice  fulcit,  " 
Atlantis,  cinctum  assidue  cui  nubibus  atris 
Piniferum  caput  et  vento  pulsatur  et  imbri, 
Nix  bumeros  infusa  tegit :  tum  flumiua  mento  250 

Praecipitant  senis,  et  glacie  riget  borrida  barba, 
Hic  primum  paribus  nitcns  Cyllenius  alis 
Constitit ;  binc  toto  praeceps  se  corpore  ad  undas 
Misit,  avi  similis,  quae^circum  litora,  circum 
Piscosos  scopulos  bumilis  volat  aequora  juxta.  255 

Haua  aliter  terras  inter  coelumque  volabat 
Litus  arenosum  ad  Libyae,  ventosque  secabat 
Materno  veniens  ab  avo  Cyllenia  proles. 
Ut  primum  alatis  tetigit  magalia  plantis, 


80  AENEIDOS    LIB,    iV. 

Aenean  fundantem  arces  ac  tecta  novantem  260 

Conspicit-:  atqiic  illi  stellatus  jaspide  fulva 

Ensis  erat,  Tyrioque  ardebat  murice  laena 

Demissa  ex  humeris^  dives  quae  munera  Dido 

Fecerat  et  tenui  telas  discreverat  auro-. 

Continuo  invadit :  "  Tu  nunc  Carthaginis  altae  265 

"  Fundamenta  locas,  pulchramque  uxorius  urbem 

"  Exstruis,  heu  regni  rerumque  ol)litetuarum  ? 

"  Ipse  deum  tibi  me  claro  demittit  Olympo 

"  Kegnator,  coelum  et  terras  qui  numine  torquet ; 

'•  Ipse  haec  ferre  jubet  celeres  mandata  per  auras :       270 

"  Quid  struis,  aut  qua  spe  Libj^^cis  teris  otia  terris  ? 

"  Si  te  nulla  movet  tantarum  gloria  rerum, 

"  Nec  super  ipse  tua  moliris  laude  laborem, 

"  Ascanium  surgentem  et  spes  heredis  luli 

"  Kespice,  cui  regnum  Italiae  Komanaque  tellus  275 

"  Debentur/'     Tali  Cyllenius  ore  locutus 

Mortales  visus  medio  sermone  reliquit, 

Et  procul  in  tenuem  ex  oculis  evanuit  auram. 

At  vero  Aeneas  adspectu  obmutuit  amens, 

Arrectaeque  horrore  comae,  et  vox  faucibus  haesit.       280 

Ardet  abire  fuga  dulcesque  relinquere  terras, 

Attonitus  tanto  monitu  imperioque  deorum. 

Heu  qviid  agat  ?  quo  nunc  reginam  ambire  furentem 

Audeat  aifatu  ?  quae  prima  exordia  sumat  ? 

Atque  animum  nunc  huc  celerem,  nunc  dividit  ilkic,    285 

In  partesque  rapit  varias,  perque  omnia  versat. 

Haec  alternanti  iDotior  sententia  visa  est : 

Mnesthea  Sergestumque  vocat  fortemque  Serestum  : 

Classem  aptent  taciti  sociosque  ad  litora  cogant, 

Aima  parent  et,  quae  rebus  sit  causa  novandis,  2i)0 

Dissimulent ;  sese  interea,  quando  optima  Dido 

Nesciat  et  tantos  rumpi  non  speret  amores, 

Tentaturum  aditus  et,  quac  mollissima  fandi 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    IV.  81 

Tempora,  quis  rebiis  dexter  modus,     Ocius  omnes 
Iraperio  laeti  parent  ac  jussa  facessunt.  295 

At  regina  dolos-quis  fallere  possit  amantem  ?- 
Praesensit,  motusque  excepit  prima  futuros, 
Omnia  tuta  timens  :  eadem  impia  Fama  furenti 
Detulit,  avmari  classem  cursumque  parari. 
Saevit  inops  animi,  totamque  incensa  per  urbem  300 

Baccliatur,  qualis  commotis  excita  sacris 
Tbyias,  ubi  audito  stimulant  trieterica  Baccbo 
Orgia  nocturnusque  vocat  clamore  Citbaeron. 
Tandem  bis  Aenean  comj)ellat  vocibus  ultro  : 
"  Dissimulare  etiam  sperasti,  perfide,  tantum  305 

"  Posse  nefas,  tacitusque  mea  decedere  terra ; 
"  Nec  te  noster  amor,  nec  te  data  dextera  quondam, 
"  Nec  moritura  tenet  crudeli  funere  Didb  ? 
"  Quin  etiam  biberno  moliris  sidere  classem, 
"  Et  mediis  properas  Aquilonibus  ire  per  altum,  310 

"  Crudelis  ?     Quid,  si  non  arva  aliena  domosque 
"  Ignotas  peteres,  et  Troja  antiqua  maneret, 
"  Tnija  per  undosum  peteretur  classibus  aequor  ? 
"  Mene  fugis  ?  Pcr  ego  bas  lacrimas  dextramque  tuam  te- 
"  Quando  aliud  mibi  jam  miserae  nihil  ipsa  reliqui-,     315 
"  Per  connubia  nostra,  per  inceptos  Hymenaeos, 
"  Si  bene  quid  de  te  merui,  fuit  aut  tibi  quidquam 
"  Dulce  meum,  miserere  domus  labentis  et  istam, 
"  Oro,  si  quis  adbuc  precibus  locus,  exue  mentem. 
"  Te  propter  Libycae  gentes  Nomadumque  tyranni      320 
"  Odere,  infensi  Tyrii ;  te  propter  eumdem 
"  Exstinctus  pudor  et,  qua  sola  sidera  adibam, 
"  Fama  prior.     Cui  me  moribundara  deseris,  bospes, 
"  Hoc  solum  nomen  quoniam  de  conjuge  restat  ? 
"  Quid  moror  ?  an,  mea  Pygmalion  dum  moenia  frater  325 
"  Destruat,  aut  captam  ducat  Gaetulus  larbas  ? 
"  Salfcem  si  qua.mibi  de  te  suscepta  fuisset 
4* 


82  AENEIDOS    LIB.    IV. 

"  Ante  fiigam  suboles,  si  quis  milii  parvulus  aula 

"  Luderet  Aencas,  qui  te  tamen  ore  referret ; 

"  Non  equidem  omniiio  capta  ac  deserta  viderer."        330 

Dixerat ;  ille  Jovis  monitis  immota  tenebat 

Lumina,  et  obnixus  curam  sub  corde  premebat. 

Tandem  pauca  refert :  "  Ego  te,  quae  plurima  faxxdo 

"  Enumerare  vales,  numquam,  regina,  negabo 

"  Promeritam,  nec  me  meminisse  pigebit  Elissae,         335 

"  Dum  memor  ipse  mei,  dum  spiritus  lios  regit  artus. 

•'  Pro  re  pauca  loquar.    Neque  ego  hanc  abscondere  furto 

"  Speravi-ne  fingc-fugam,  nec  conjugis  umquam 

"  Praetendi  taedas,  aut  haec  in  foedera  veni. 

"  Me  si  fata  meis  paterentur  ducere  vitam  340 

"  Auspiciis  et  sponte  mea  componere  curas  ; 

^'  Urbem  Trojanam  primum  dulcesque  meorum 

"  Eeliquias  colerem,  Priami  tecta  alta  manerent, 

"  Et  recidiva  manu  posuissem  Pergama  victis. 

''  Sed  nunc  Italiam  magnam  Gryneus  ApoUo,  345 

"  Italiam  Lyciae  jussere  capessere  sortes  : 

"  Hic  amor,  haec  patria  est.     Si  te  Carthaginis  arces, 

*'  Phoenissam,  Libycaeque  adspectus  detinet  urbis  : 

"  Quae  tandem,  Ausonia  Teucros  considere  terra, 

"  Invidia  est  ?  Et  nos  fas  extera  quaerere  regna.  350 

"  Me  patris  Anchisae,  quoties  humentibus  umbris 

"  Nox  operit  terras,  quoties  astra  ignea  surgunt, 

'^  Admonet  in  somnis  et  turbida  terret  imago  ; 

"  Me  puer  Ascanius  capitisquc  injuria  cari, 

'*  Quem  regno  Hesperiae  fraudo  et  fotalibus  arvis.        355 

*'  Nunc  etiam  interpres  divum,  Jove  missus  ab  ipso- 

*'  Testor  utrumque  caput-,  celcres  mandata  per  auras 

"  Detulit :  ipse  deum  maniiesto  in  himine  vidi 

"  Intrantem  muros,  vocemque  his  auribus  hausi. 

"  Desine  meque  tuis  incendere  teque  querelis :  360 

"  Italiam  non  spontc  sequor." 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    IV.  83 

Talia  diccnlcm  jamdudum  aversa  tuetur, 
Huc  illuc  volvens  oculos,  totumque  pererrat 
Luminibus  tacitis,  et  sic  accensa  profatur : 
"  Nec  tibi  diva  parens,  generis  nec  Dardanus  auctor,    365 
"  Perfide  ;  sed  duris  genuit  te  cautibus  horrens 
"  Caucasus,  Hyrcanaeque  admorunt  ubera  tigres. 
"  Nam  quid  dissimulo,  aut  quae  me  ad  majora  reservo  ? 
'^  Num  fletu  ingemuit  nostro  ?  num  lumina  flexit  ?      369 
'^  Num  lacrimas  victus  dedit,  aut  miseratus  amantem  est  ? 
*'  Quae  quibus  anteferam  ?  Jam  jam  nec  raaxima  Juno,  371 
"  Nec  Saturnius  haec  oculis  pater  adspicit  aequis. 
"  Nusquam  tuta  fides.     Ejectum  litore,  egentem 
"  Excepi  et  regni  demens  in  parte  locavi ; 
"  Amissam  classem,  socios  a  morte  reduxi :-  375 

"  Heu  furiis  incensa  feror  !-  nunc  augur  ApoUo, 
"  Nunc  Lyciae  sortes,  nunc  et  Jove  missus  ab  ipso 
"  Interpres  divum  fert  horrida  jussa  per  auras. 
"  Scilicet  is  superis  labor  est,  ea  cura  quietos 
"  Sollicitat.     Neque  te  teneo,  neque  dicta  refello.         380 
"  I,  sequere  Italiam  ventis !  pete  regna  per  iindas  ! 
"  Spero  equidem  mediis,  si  quid  pia  numina  possunt, 
"  Supplicia  hausurum  scopulis,  et  nomine  Dido 
"  Saepe  vocaturum.     Sequar  atris  ignibus  absens, 
"  Et,  quum  frigida  mors  anima  seduxerit  artus,  385 

"  Omnibus  umbra  locis  adero.     Dabis,  improbe,  poenas, 
"  Audiam,  et  haec  Manes  veniet  mihi  fama  sub  imos." 
His  medium  dictis  sermonem  abrumpit,  ct  auras 
Aegra  fugit,  seque  ex  ocuKs  avertit  et  aufert, 
Linquens  multa  metu  cunctantem  et  multa  parantem  390 
Dicere.     Suscipiunt  famulae,  collapsaque  membra 
Marmoreo  referunt  thalamo  stratisque  reponunt. 
At  pius  Aeneas,  quamquam  lenire  dolentem 
Solando  cupit  et  dictis  avertere  ciiras, 
Multa  gemens  magnoque  animum  labefactus  amore,     395 


84  AENEIDOS    LIB.    IV. 

Jussa  tamen  cliviim  exsequitur,  ciassemque  revisit. 

Tum  vero  Teucri  incumbunt,  et  litore  cclsas 

Dcducunt  toto  naves.     Natat  uncta  carina, 

Frondentesque  ferunt  remos  et  robora  silvis 

Infabricata,  fugae  studio.  400 

Migrantes  cernas  totaque  ex  urLe  ruentes, 

Ac  velut  ingcntcm  formicae  farris  acervum 

Quum  populant,  liiemis  memores,  tectoque  reponunt ; 

It  nigrum  campis  agmen  praedamque  per  lierbas 

Convectant  calle  augusto,  pars  grandia  trudunt  406 

Obnixae  frumenta  Immeris,  pars  agmina  cogunt 

Castigantque  moras  ;  opere  omnis  semita  fervet. 

Quis  tibi  tunc,  Dido,  cernenti  talia  sensus  ? 

Quosve  dabas  gemitus,  quum  litora  fervere  late 

Prospiceres  arce  ex  summa,  totumque  videres  41.0 

Misceri  ante  oculos  tantis  clamoribus  aequor  ? 

Improbe  amor,  quid  non  mortalia  pectora  cogis  ? 

Ire  itcrum  in  lacrimas,  iterum  tentare  prccando 

Cogitur  et  supplex  animos  submittere  amori, 

Ne  quid  inexpertum  frustra  moritura  relinquat.  415 

"  Anna,  vides  toto  properari  litore  ?     Circum 

"  Undique  convenere  ;  vocat  jam  carbasus  auras, 

"  Puppibus  et  laeti  nautae  imposuere  coronas. 

"  Hunc  ego  si  potui  tantum  sperare  dolorem, 

"  Et  perferre,  soror,  potero.  Miserae  hoc  tamen  unum  420 

''  Exsequere,  Anna,  mihi-solam  nam  pcrfidus  ille 

*•  Te  colere,  arcanos  etiam  tibi  credere  sensus  ; 

"  Sola  viri  moUes  aditus  et  tempora  noras- : 

"  I,  soror,  atque  hostem  supplex  affare  superbum. 

"  Non  ego  cum  Danais  Trojanam  cxscindere  gentem    425 

''  Aulide  juravi,  classemve  ad  Pergama  misi, 

"  Ncc  patris  Anchisae  cinerem  Manesvc  revelli : 

''  Cur  mea  dicta  ncgat  duras  demittere  in  aurcs  ? 

"  Quo  ruit  ?    Extremum  lioc  miserao  det  munus  amanti : 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    IV.  85 

"  Exspectet  facilemque  fugam  ventosque  fereutes.         430 

"  Non  jam  conjugium  antiquum,  quod  prodidit,  oro, 

"Nec,  pulcliro  ut  Latio  careat  regnumque  relinquat : 

"  Tempus  inane  peto,  requiem  spatiumque  furori, 

"  Dum  mea  me  victam  doceat  fortuna  dolere. 

"  Extremam  hanc  oro  veniam-miserere  sororis-,  435 

"  Quam  milii  quum  dederis,  cumulatam  morto  remittam.'** 

Talibus  orabat,  talesquc  miserrima  fletus 

Fertque  refertque  soror  ;  sed  nuUis  ille  movetur 

Fletibus,  aut  voces  uUas  tractabilis  audit : 

Fata  obstant,  placidasque  viri  deus  obstruit  aures.       440 

Ac  velut  annoso  validam  quum  robore  quercum 

Alpini  Boreae  nunc  hinc  nunc  flatibus  illinc 

Eruere  inter  se  certant ;  it  stridor  et  altae 

Consternunt  terram  concusso  stipite  frondes  ; 

Ipsa  haeret  scopulis  et,  quantum  vertice  ad  auras        445 

Aetherias,  tantum  radice  iii  Tartara  tendit : 

Haud  secus  assiduis  hinc  atque  hinc  vocibus  heros 

Tunditur,  et  magno  persentit  pectore  curas  ; 

Mens  immota  manet,  lacrimae  volvuntur  inanes. 

Tum  vero  infelix  fatis  exterrita  Dido  450 

Mortem  orat ;  taedet  coeli  convexa  tueri. 
Quo  magis  inceptum  peragat  lucemque  relinquat, 
Vidit,  turicremis  quum  dona  imponeret  aris,- 
Horrendum  dictu-latices  nigrescere  sacros, 
Fusaque  in  obscenum  se  vertere  vina  cruorem.  455 

Hoc  visum  nulli,  non  ipsi  effata  sorori. 
Praeterea  fuit  in  tectis  de  marmore  templum 
Conjugis  antiqui,  miro  quod  honore  colebat, 
Velleribus  niveis  et  festa  fronde  revinctum  : 
Hinc  exaudiri  voces  et  verba  vocantis  460 

Visa  viri,  nox  quum  terras  obscura  teneret ; 
Solaque  culminibus  fer^li  carmine  bubo 
Baepe  queri  et  longas  in  fietum  ducere  voces. 


8G  AENEIDOS    LIB.    IV. 

Multaque  praeterca  vatum  praedicta  priorum 

Terribili  monitu  horrificant.     Agit  ipse  furentem  465 

In  somuis  ferus  Aeneas,  semperque  relinqui 

Sola  sibi,  semper  longam  incomitata  \ddetur 

Ire  viam  et  Tyrios  deserta  quaerere  terra : 

Eumcnidum  veluti  dcmens  videt  agmina  Pentlieus, 

Et  solem  gcminum  et  duplices  se  ostendere  Thebas  ;    470 

Aut  Agamemnonius  scenis  agitatus  Orestes, 

Armatam  facibus  matrem  et  serpentibus  atris 

Quum  fugit,  ultricesque  sedent  in  limine  Dirae. 

Ergo  ubi  concepit  furias,  evicta  dolore, 

Decrevitque  mori,  tempus  secum  ipsa  modumque       475 

Exigit  et,  maestam  dictis  aggressa  sororem, 

Consilium  vultu  tegit  ac  spem  fronte  serenat : 

"  Inveni,  germana,  viam-gratare  sorori-, 

"  Quae  mihi  reddat  eum,  vel  eo  me  solvat  amantem. 

"  Oceani  finem  juxta  solemque  cadentem  480 

"  Ultimus  Aethiopum  locus  est,  ubi  maximus  Atlas 

"  Axem  humero  torquet  stellis  ardentibus  aptum : 

"  Hinc  mihi  Massylae  gentis  monstrata  sacerdos, 

"  Hesperidum  templi  custos,  epulasque  draconi 

"  Quae  dabat  et  sacros  servabat  in  arbore  ramos,  485 

"  Spargens  humida  mella  soporiferumque  papaver. 

"  Haec  se  carminibus  promittit  solvere  mentes, 

"  Quas  veUt,  ast  aliis  duras  immittere  curas, 

"  Sistere  aquam  fluviis  et  vertere  sidera  retro, 

"  Nocturnosque  ciet  Manes  ;  mugire  vidcbis  490 

"  Sub  pedibus  terram  ct  descendere  montibus  ornos. 

"  Tcstor,  cara,  deos  et  te,  germana,  tuumque 

"  Dulce  caput,  magicas  invitam  accingier  artes. 

"  Tu  sccreta  pyram  tecto  interiore  sub  auras 

'*  Erige,  et  arma  vin,  thahimo  quae  fixa  reliquit  495 

"  Impius,  exuviasque  omnes  lectumque  jugalem, 

'•*  Quo  perii,  superimponas  :  abolere  nefandi 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    IV,  87 

"  Cuncta  viri  monumenta  juvat,  monstratque  sacerdos." 

Haec  effata  silet,  j)allor  simul  occupat  ora. 

Non  tamen  Anna  novis  praetexere  funera  sacris  500 

Germanam  credit,  nec  tantos  mente  furores 

Concipit,  aut  graviora  timet,  quam  morte  Sychaei. 

Ergo  jussa  parat, 

At  regina,  pyra  penetrali  in  sede  sub  auras 

Erecta  ingenti  taedis  atque  ilice  secta,  505 

Intenditque  locum  scrtis  et  fronde  coronat 

Funerea ;  super  exuvias  ensemque  relictum 

Effigiemque  toro  locat,  liaud  ignara  futuri, 

Stant  arae  circum,  et  crines  effusa  sacerdos 

Ter  centum  tonat  ore  deos,  Erebumque  Chaosque        510 

Tergeminamque  Hecaten,  tria  virginis  ora  Dianae. 

Sparserat  et  latices  simulatos  fontis  Averni ; 

Falcibus  et  messae  ad  lunam  quaeruntur  aenis 

Pubentes  herbae  nigri  cum  lacte  veneni ; 

Quaeritur  et  nascentis  equi  de  fronte  revulsus  515 

Et  matri  praereptus  amor. 

Ipsa  mola  manibusque  piis  altaria  juxta, 

Unum  exuta  pcdem  vinclis,  in  veste  recincta, 

Testatur  moritura  deos  et  conscia  fati 

Sidera  ;  tum,  si  quod  non  aequo  foedere  amantes  520 

Curae  numen  habet  justumque  memorque,  precatur, 

Nox  erat,  et  placidum  carpebant  fessa  soporem 

Corpora  per  terras,  silvaeque  et  saeva  quierant 

Aequora,  quum  medio  volvuntur  sidera  lapsu, 

Quum  tacet  omnis  ager  ;  pecudes  XJictaeque  volucres,  525 

Quaeque  lacus  late  liquidos,  quaeque  aspera  dumis 

Kura  tenent,  somno  positae  sub  nocte  silenti, 

[Lenibant  curas  et  corda  oblita  laborum,] 

At  non  infelix  animi  Phoenissa,  nec  umquam 

Solvitur  in  somnos,  oculisve  aut  pectore  noctem  530 

Accipit  :  ingeminant  curae,  rursusque  resurgens 


88  AENEIDOS    LIB.    IV. 

Sacvit  amor  magiioque  irarum  fiuctuat  aestu. 

Sic  adeo  insistit,  secumque  ita  corde  volutat : 

"  En,  quid  ago  ?     Rursusnc  procos  irrisa  priorcs 

"  Experiar,  Nomadumque  petam  connuLia  supplex,    535 

"  Quos  ego  sim  totics  jam  dedignata  maritos  ? — 

"  Iliacas  igitur  classes  atque  ultima  Teucrum 

''  Jussa  sequar  ?  quiane  auxilio  juvat  ante  levatos, 

"  Et  benc  apud  memores  veteris  stat  gratia  facti? — 

"  Quis  me  autem-fac  velle-sinet,  ratibusque  superbis    540 

"  Invisam  accipiet  ?  nescis,  heu,  perdita,  necdum 

"  Laomedonteae  sentis  perjuria  gentis  ? 

"  Quid  tum  ?     Sola  fuga  nautas  comitabor  ovantes, 

"  An  Tyriis  omnique  manu  stipata  meorum 

"  Inferar  et,  quos  Sidonia  vix  urbe  revelli,  545 

"  Rursus  agam  pelago  et  ventis  dare  vela  jubebo  ? — 

"  Quin  morere,  ut  merita  es,  ferroque  averte  dolorem  ! 

"  Tu,  lacrlmis  evicta  meis,  tu  prima  furentem 

"  His,  gcrmana,  malis  oneras,  atque  objicis  hosti. 

"  Non  hcuit  thalami  expertem  sine  crimine  vitam        550 

"  DegerC,  more  ferae,  tales  nec  tangere  curas  ! 

"  Non  scrvata  fides,  cineri  promissa  Sychaeo  !  " 

Tantos  illa  suo  rumpebat  pectore  questus. 

Aeneas  celsa  in  puppi,  jam  certus  eundi, 
Carpebat  somnos,  rebus  jam  rite  paratis.  555 

Huic  se  forma  dei  vultu  redeuntis  eodem 
ObtuHt  in  somnis,  rursusque  ita  visa  monere  est, 
Omnia  Mercurio  similis,  vocemque  coloremque 
Et  crines  flavos  et  membra  decora  juventa  : 
"  Nate  dea,  potes  hoc  sub  casu  ducere  somnos,  560 

''  Nec,  quae  te  circum  stent  deinde  pericula,  cernis, 
"  Demens,  nec  Zephyros  audis  spirare  secundos  ? 
"  Illa  dolos  dirumquc  nefas  in  pectore  versat, 
*'  Certa  mori,  varioque  irarum  fluctuat  aestu. 
"  Non  fugis  hinc  rraccepp,  dum  praccipitare  potestas  ?  565 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    IV.  89 

"  Jam  mare  turbari  trabibus  saevasque  videbis 

"  Collucere  faces,  jam  fervere  litora  fiammis, 

"  Si  te  his  attigerit  terris  Aurora  morantem. 

"  Eja  age,  rumpe  moras  :  varium  et  mutabile  semper 

"  Femina."     Sic  fatus  nocti  se  immiscuit  atrae.  570 

Tum  vero  Aeneas,  subitis  exterritus  umbris, 

Corripit  e  somno  corpus  sociosq[ue  fatigat : 

"  Praecipites  vigilate,  viri,  et  considite  transtris  ; 

"  Solvite  vela  citi !     Deus  aethere  missus  ab  alto 

"  Festinare  fugam  tortggque  incidere  funes  575 

"  Ecce  iteram  stimulat.     Sequimur  te,  sancte  deorum, 

"  Quisquis  es,  imperioque  iterum  paremus  ovantes. 

"  Adsis  0  placidusque  juves,  et  sidera  coelo 

"  Dextra  feras."     Dixit,  vaginaque  eripit  ensem 

Fulmineum,  strictoque  ferit  retinacula  ferro.  580 

Idem  omnes  simul  ardor  habet,  rapiuntque  ruuntque  ; 

Litora  deseruere  ;  latet  sub  classibus  aequor ; 

Annixi  torquent  spumas  et  caerula  verrunt. 

Et  jam  prima  novo  spargebat  lumine  terras 
Tithoni  croceum  linquens  Aurora  cubile.  585 

Regina  e  speculis  ut  primum  albescere  lucem 
Vidit  et  aequatis  classem  procedere  velis, 
Litoraque  et  vacuos  sensit  sine  remige*  portus  ; 
Terque  quaterque  manu  pectus  percussa  decorum, 
Flaventesque  abscissa  comas,  "  Pro  Jupiter,  ibit  590 

"  Hic,"  ait,  "  et  nostris  illuserit  advena  regnis  ? 
"  Non  arma  expedient,  totaque  ex  urbe  sequentur, 
"  Deripientque  rates  ahi  navalibus  7     Ite, 
"  Ferte  citi  flammas,  date  tela,  impeUite  remos  ! —       594 
"  Quid  loquor,  aut  ubi  sum .?  Quae  mentem  insania  mutat .? 
"  Infelix  Dido,  nunc  te  facta  impia  tangunt  !  596 

"  Tunc  decuit,  quum  sceptra  dabas. — En  dextra  fidesque, 
"  Quem  secum  patrios  aiunt  portare  Penates, 
"  Quem  subiisse  humeris  confectum  aetate  parentem  ! — 


90  AENEIDOS    LIB.    IV. 

"  Non  potui  aLreptum  divcllcre  corpus  et  undis  600 

"  Spargere  ?=  non  socios,  non  ipsum  absumere  ferro 

"  Ascanium,  patriisque  epulandum  ponerc  mensis  ? — 

"  Verum  anceps  pugnae  fuerat  fortuna. — Fuisset : 

"  Quem  metui  moritura  ?     Faces  in  castra  tulissem, 

"  Implessemque  foros  flammis,  natumque  patremque    605 

"  Cum  genere  exstinxem,  memet  snj)er  ipsa  dedissem. — 

"  Sol,  qui  terrarum  flammis  opera  omnia  lustras, 

"  Tuque  harum  interpres  curarum  et  conscia  Juno, 

"  Nocturnisque  Hecate  triviis  ululata  per  urbes, 

"  Et  Dirae  ultrices,  et  di  morientis  Elissae,  610 

"  Accipite  baec,  meritumque  malis  advertite  numen, 

"  Et  nostras  audite  preces.     Si  tangere  portus 

"  Infandum  caput  ac  terris  adnare  necesse  est, 

"  Et  sic  fata  Jovis  poscunt,  hic  terminus  haeret : 

'' At  bello  audacis  populi  vexatus  ct  armis,  615 

"  Finibus  extorris,  complexu  avulsus  luli, 

"  Auxilium  imploret,  videatque  indigna  suorum 

"  Funera,  nec,  quum  se  sub  leges  pacis  iuiquae 

"  Tradiderit,  regno  aut  optata  luce  fruatur, 

"  Sed  cadat  ante  diem  mediaque  inhum.atus  arena.       620 

"  Haec  precor,  hanc  vocem  extremam  cum  sanguine  fundo. 

"  Tum  vos,  0  Tyrii,  stirpem  et  genus  omne  faturum 

"  Exercete  odiis,  cinerique  haec  mittite  nostro 

"  Munera.     Nullus  amor  populis,  nec  foedera  sunto, 

"  Exoriare  aliquis  nostris  ex  ossibus  ultor,  625 

"  Qui  face  Dardanios  ferroque  sequare  colonos, 

"  Nunc,  oKm,  quocumque  dabunt  se  tempore  vires. 

"  Litora  litoribus  contraria,  fluctibus  undas 

"  Imprecor,  arma  armis  ;  pugnent  ipsique  nepotesque  ! " 

Hacc  ait,  et  partcs  animum  versabat  in  omnes,  630 

Invisam  quaerens  quam  priunim  abrumpere  hicem. 

Tum  breviter  Barcen  nutricem  afllita  Sychaei : 

Namque  suam  patria  antiqua  cinis  atcr  habebat : 


AENEIDOS    LIB,    IV.  91 

"  Aunam  cara  milii  nutrix  liuc  siste  sororem ; 

"  Dic,  corpus  properet  fiuviali  spargere  lympha,  635 

"  Et  pecudes  secum  et  monstrata  piacula  ducat 

"  Sic  veniat ;  tuque  ipsa  pia  tege  tempora  vitta. 

"  Sacra  Jovi  Stygio,  quae  rite  incepta  paravi, 

"  Perficere  est  animus,  finemque  imponere  curis, 

"  Dardaniique  rogum  capitis  permittere  flaramae."       640 

Sic  ait ;  illa  gradum  studio  celerabat  anilem. 

At  trepida  et  coeptis  immanibus  efiera  Dido, 

Sanguineam  volvens  aciem  maculisque  trementes 

Interfusa  genas  et  pallida  morte  futura, 

Interiora  domus  irrumpit  limina,  et  altos  645 

Conscendit  furibunda  rogos,  ensemque  recludit 

Dardanium,  non  bos  quaesitum  munus  in  usus. 

Hic  postquam  Iliacas  vestes  notumque  cubile 

Conspexit,  paullum  lacrimis  et  mente  morata, 

Incubuitque  toro,  dixitque  novissima  verba :  650 

"  Dulces  exuviae,  dum  fata  deusque  sinebat, 

"  Accipite  hanc  animam,  meque  bis  exsolvite  curis. 

"  Vixi  et,  quem  dederat  cursum  fortuna,  peregi, 

"  Et  nunc  magna  mei  sub  terras  ibit  imago. 

"  Urbem  praeclaram  statui,  mea  moenia  vidi ;  655 

"  Ulta  virum,  poenas  inimico  a  fratre  recepi : 

"  Felix,  heu  nimium  felix,  si  litora  tantum 

"  Numquam  Dardaniae  tetigissent  nostra  carinae  !" 

Dixit  et,  os  impressa  toro,  "  Moriemur  inultae  ; 

"  Sed  moriamur !  "  ait :  "  sic,  sic  juvat  ire  sub'  umbras.  660 

"  Hauriat  hunc  oculis  ignem  crudelis  ab  alto 

"  Dardanus,  et  nostrae  secum  ferat  omiua  mortis." 

Dixerat  ;  atque  illam  media  inter  talia  ferro 

Collapsam  adspiciunt  comites,  ensemque  cruore 

Spumantem  sparsasque  manus.     It  clamor  ad  alta       665 

Atria ;  concussam  bacchatur  fama  per  urbem  ; 

Lamentis  gemituque  et  femineo  ululatu 


92  AENEIDOS    LIB.    IV. 

Tecta  fremunt ;  rcsonat  magnis  plangoribus  aether, 
Non  aliter,  quam  si  immissis  ruat  hostibus  omnis 
Cartliago  aut  antiqua  Tyros,  flammaeque  furentes        670 
Culmina  perque  liominum  volvantur  perque  deorum, 
Audiit  exanimis,  trepidoque  exterrita  cursu, 
Unguibus  ora  soror  foedans  et  pectora  pugnis, 
Per  medios  ruit,  ac  morientem  nomine  clamat : 
'  Hoc  illud,  germana,  fuit  ?  me  fraude  petebas  ?  675 

'  Hoc  rogus  iste  mihi,  boc  ignes  araeque  parabant  ? 
'  Quid  primum  deserta  querar  ?  comitemne  sororem 
'  Sprevisti  moriens  ?     Eadem  me  ad  fata  vocasses  ; 
'  Idem  ambas  ferro  dolor  atque  eadem  bora  tulisset ! 
'  His  etiam  struxi  manibus,  patriosque  vocavi  680 

'  Voce  deos,  sic  te  ut  posita,  crudelis,  abessem  ? 
'  Exstinxti  te  meque,  soror,  popuhimque  patresque 
*  Sidonios  urbemque  tuam.     Date,  vulnera  lymphis 
'  Abluam,  et,  extremus  si  quis  super  halitus  errat, 
'  Ore  legam."     Sic  fata  gradus  evaserat  altos,  685 

Semianimemque  sinu  germanam  amplexa  fovebat 
Cum  gemitu,  atque  atros  siccabat  veste  cruores. 
IUa,  graves  oculos  conata  attollere,  rursus 
Deficit ;  infixum  stridit  sub  pectore  vulnus. 
Ter  sese  attoUens  cubitoque  annixa  levavit ;  690 

Ter  revoluta  toro  est,  oculisque  crrantibus  alto 
Quaesivit  coelo  lucem,  ingemuitque  reperta. 
Tum  Juno  omnipotens,  longum  miserata  dolorem 
Difficilesque  bbitus,  Irim  demisit  Olympo, 
Quae  luctantem  animam  nexosque  resolveret  artus.      Q';^^ 
Nam  quia  nec  fato  merita  nec  morte  peribat, 
Sed  misera  ante  diem  subitoque  accensa  furore, 
Nondum  illi  flavum  Proserpina  vertice  crincm 
Abstulerat,  Stygioque  caput  damnaverat  Orco. 
Ergo  Iris  croceis  per  coelum  roscida  pennis,  700 


AENEIDOS    LID.    IV.  93 

Mille  trahens  varios  advcrso  sole  colores, 

Devolat,  et  siipra  caput  adstitit :   "  Hunc  ego  Diti 

"  Sacrum  jussa  ferOj  teque  isto  corpore  solvo." 

Sic  ait,  et  dextra  crinem  secat :  oranis  et  una 

Dilapsus  calor,  atque  in  ventos  vita  recessit.  705 


P.  VIKGILII  MARO^IS  ' 

AENEIDOS 

LIBEE  QUINTUS. 


Interea  medium  Aeneas  jam  classe  tenebat 

Certus  iter,  fluctusque  atros  Aquilone  sccabat, 

Moenia  respiciens,  quae  jam  infelicis  Elissae 

Collucent  flammis.     Quae  tantum  accenderit  ignera, 

Caussa  latet  ;  duri  magno  sed  amore  dolores  5 

PoUuto,  notumque,  furens  quid  femina  possit, 

Triste  per  auguriumi  Teucrorum  jiectora  ducunt. 

Ut  pelagus  tenuere  rates,  nec  jam  amplius  ulla 

Occurrit  tellus,  maria  undique  et  undique  coelum  ; 

Olli  caeraleus  supra  caput  adstitit  imber,  10 

Noctem  hiememque  ferens,  et  inliorruit  unda  tcncbris. 

Ipse  gubernator  puppi  Palinurus  ab  alta  : 

"  Heu,  quianam  tanti  cinxerunt  aethera  nimbi  ^? 

"  Quidve,  pater  Neptune,  paras  7  "     Sic  deinde  locutus 

Colligere  arma  jubet  validisque  incumbere  remis,  15 

Obliquatque  siuus  in  ventum,  ac  talia  fatur  : 

"  Magnanime  Aenea,  non,  si  mihi  Jupiter  auctor 

"  Spondeat,  hoc  sperem  IlaHam  contingere  coelo. 

"  Mutati  transversa  fremunt  ct  vespere  ab  atro 

"  Consurgunt  venti,  atque  in  nubcm  cogitur  aor ;  20 

"  Nec  nos  obniti  contra  ncc  tcndcre  tantum 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    V,  95 

"  Sufficimus.     Superat  quoniam  Fortuna,  sequamur, 

"  Quoque  vocat,  vertamus  iter.     Nec  litora  longe 

"  Fida  reor  fraterna  Erycis  portusque  Sicanos, 

"  Si  modo  rite.memor  servata  remetior  astra."  25 

Tum  pius  Aeneas  ;  "  Equidem  sic  poscere  ventos 

"  Jamdudum  et  frustra  cerno  te  tendere  contra  : 

"  Flecte  viam  velis.     An  sit  milii  gratior  ulla, 

"  Quove  magis  fessas  optem  demittere  naves, 

"  Quam  quae  Dardanium  tellus  milii  servat  Acesten,    30 

"  Et  patris  Ancliisae  gremio  complectitur  ossa  ?  " 

Haec  ubi  dicta ;  petunt  portus,  et  vela  secundi 

Tntendunt  Zephyri :  fertur  cita  gurgite  classis, 

Et  tandem  laeti  notae  advertuntur  arenae. 

At  procul  excelso  miratus  vertice  montis  35 

Adventum  sociasque  rates,  occurrit  Acestes, 
Horridus  in  jaculis  et  pelle  Libystidis  ursae, 
Troia  Crimiso  conceptum  flumine  mater 
Quem  genuit.     Veterum  non  immemor  ille  parentum, 
Gratatur  reduces  et  gaza  laetus  agrcsti  40 

Excipit,  ac  fessos  opibus  solatur  amicis. 
Postera  quum  primo  stellas  Oriente  fugarat 
Clara  dics  ;  socios  in  coetum  litore  ab  omni 
Advocat  Aeneas  tumulique  ex  aggere  fatur  : 
'  Dardanidae  magni,  genus  alto  a  sanguine  divum,        45 
'  Annuus  exactis  completur  mensibus  orbis, 
'  Ex  quo  reliquias  divinique  ossa  parentis 
'  Condidimus  terra  maestasque  sacravimus  aras, 
'  Jamque  dies,  nisi  fallor,  adest,  quem  semper  acerbum, 
'  Semper  bonoratum-sic  di  voluistis-liabebo.  50 

'  Hunc  ego  Gaetulis  agerem  si  Syrtibus  exsul, 
'  Argolicove  mari  deprensus  et  urbe  Mycenae  ; 
'  Annua  vota  tamen  solemnesque  ordine  pompas 
'  Exsequerer,  strueremque  suis  altaria  donis. 
'  Nunc  ultro  ad  cineres  ipsius  et  ossa  parentis,  55 


96  AENEIDO.S    LIB.    V. 

"  Haud  equidcm  sine  mente  rcor,  sine  uumiuc  divum, 

"  Adsumus,  ct  portus  delati  intramus  amicos  : 

"  Eriro  asitc  et  laetum  cuncti  cclebremus  honorem  : 

"  Poscamus  ventos,  atquc  hacc  me  sacra  quptanuis 

•'  Urbe  velit  posita  temphs  sibi  ferre  dicatis.  GO 

"  Bina  boum  vobis  Troja  generatus  Acestcs 

'•■  Dat  numero  capita  in  naves  :  adhibete  Penatcs 

"  Et  patrios  cpuhs  et  quos  colit  hospes  Acestes. 

"  Praeterea,  si  nona  diem  mortalibus  ahnum 

"  Aurora  extulerit  radiisque  retexerit  orbcm,  65 

"  Prima  citac  Teucris  ponam  ccrtamina  classis ; 

"  Quique  pcdum  cursu  valet,  et  qui  viribus  audax 

"  Aut  jaculo  incedit  mehor  levibusque  sagittis, 

"  Scu  crudo  fidit  pugnam  committere  ccstu : 

"  Cuncti  adsint,  meritacque  exspectent  praemia  palmae.  70 

"  Ore  favcte  omnes.ct  cingite  tempora  ramis." 

Sic  fatus,  velat  materna  tempora  myrto. 

Hoc  Helymus  facit,  hoc  aevi  maturus  Acestes, 

Hoc  puer  Ascanius,  scquitur  quos  cetera  pubes. 

Ille  e  concilio  multis  cum  millibus  ibat  75 

Ad  tumuhim,  magna  medius  comitante  caterva.  • 

Hic  duo  ritc  mero  Hbans  carchesia  Baccho 

Fundit  humi,  duo  lacte  novo,  duo  sanguine  sacro, 

Purpureosque  jacit  florcs,  ac  talia  fatur : 

"  Salvc,  sancte  parens ;  iterum  salvete,  reccpti  80 

"  Ncquidquam  cineres  auimaeque  umbraequc  paternae  ! 

''  Non  Kcuit  fines  Italos  fatahaque  arva, 

"Nec  tecumAusonium,quicumquc  cst,quaercroThybrim." 

Dixerat  hacc,  adytis  quum  lubricus  anguis  ab  imis 

Scptem  ingens  gyros,  septcna  voUmiina  tra^it,  85 

Aniph^xus  placide  tunmluin,  Lapsusque  per  aras, 

Caeruleao  cui  terga  notae,  maculosus  et  auro 

Squamam  inccndebat  fulgor,  ceu  nubibus  arcus 

Mille  jacit  varios  advcrso  sole  colorcs. 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    V.  97 

Obstiipuit  visu  Aeneas.     Ille  agmine  longo  90 

Tandem  inter  pate^ras  et  levia  pocula  serpens 
Libavitque  dapes,  rursusque  innoxius  imo 
Successit  tumulo  et  depasta  altaria  liquit. 
Hoc  magis  inccptos  genitori  instaurat  honores, 
Incertus,  Geniumne  loci  famulumne  parentis  95 

Esse  putet ;  caedit  binas  de  more  bidentes 
Totque  sues  totidemque  nigrantes  terga  juvencos. 
Vinaque  fundebat  pateris,  animamque  vocabat 
Anchisae  magni  Manesque  Acheronte  remissos. 
Nec  non  et  socii,  quae  cuique  est  copia,  laeti  100 

Dona  ferunt :  onerant  aras  mactantque  juvencos  ; 
Ordine  aena  locant  alii,  fusique  per  herbam 
Subjiciunt  veribus  prunas  et  viscera  torrent. 
Exspectata  dies  aderat  nonamque  serena 
A"uroram  Phaethontis  equi  jam  luce  vehebant,  105 

Famaque  finitimos  et  clari  nomen  Acestae 
Excierat :  laeto  complerant  litora  coetu, 
Visuri  Aeneadas,  pars  et  certare  parati. 
Munera  principio  ante  oculos  circoque  locantur 
In  medio,  sacri  tripodes  viridesque  coronae  110 

Et  palmae,  pretium  victoribus,  armaque  et  ostro 
Perfusae  vestes,  argenti  aurique  talentum ; 
Et.tuba  commissos  medio  canit  aggere  ludos. 
Prima  pares  ineunt  gravibus  certamina  remis 
Quatuor  ex  omni  delectae  classe  carinae.  115 

Velocem  Mnestheus  agit  acri  remige  Pristim, 
Mox  Italus  Mnesthcus,  genus  a  quo  nomine  Memmi ; 
Ingentemque  Gyas  ingenti  mole  Chimaeram, 
IJrbis  opus,  triplici  pubes  quam  Dardana  versu 
ImpeUunt,  terno  consurgunt  ordine  remi ;  12C 

Sergestusque,  domus  tenet  a  quo  Sergia  nomen, 
Centauro  invehitur  magna  ;  Scyllaque  Cloanthus 
Caerulea,  genus  unde  tibi,  Eomane  Cluenti. 
5 


93  AENEIDOS    LIB.    V. 

Est  procul  in  pelago  saxum  spumantia  contra 
liitora,  quod  tumidis  submcrsum  tunditur  olim  125 

Fluctibus,  hibcrni  condunt  ubi  sidera  Cori ; 
Tranquillo  silet,  immotaque  attollitur  unda 
Oampus  ct  apricis  statio  gratissima  mergis : 
Ilic  viiidem  Aeneas  frondenti  ex  ilice  metam 
Constituit  signum  nautis  pater,  unde  revcrti  130 

Scirent  et  longos  ubi  circumflectere  cursus. 
Tum  loca  sorte  legunt,  ipsique  in  puppibus  auro 
Ductores  longe  effulgent  ostroque  decori ; 
Cetera  populea  velatur  fronde  juventus, 
Nudatosque  bumeros  oleo  perfusa  nitescit.  135 

Considunt  transtris,  intentaque  bracbia  remis  : 
Intenti  exspectant  signum,  exsultantiaque  baurit 
Corda  pavor  pulsans  laudumque  arrecta  cupido. 
Inde,  ubi  clara  dedit  sonitum  tuba,  finibus  omnes- 
Haud  mora-prosiluere  suis:  ferit  aetbera  clamor  140 

Nauticus,  adductis  spumant  freta  versa  lacertis  ; 
Infindunt  pariter  sulcos,  totumque  debiscit 
Convulsum  remis  rostrisque  tridentibus  aequor. 
Non  tam  praecipites  bijugo  certaminc  campum 
Corripuere  ruuntque  effusi  carcere  currus,  145 

Nec  sic  immissis  aurigae  undantia  lora 
Concussere  jugis,  pronique  in  verbera  pcndent. 
Tum  plausu  frcmituque  virum  studiisque  favcntum 
Consonat  omne  nemus,  vocemque  inclusa  volutant 
Litora,  pulsati  coUes  ckmore  rcsultant,  150 

Effugit  ante  alios  primisque  elabitur  undis 
Turbam  inter  frcmitumque  Gyas,  quem  deiude  Cloantbus 
Consequitur,  melior  remis,  sed  pondere  pinus 
Tarda  tenet.     Post  bos  aequo  discrimine  Prislis 
Centaurusque  locum  tendunt  supcrare  priorem,  155 

Et  nunc  Pristis  babet,  nunc  victam  praeterit  ingens 
Ccntaurus,  nunc  una  ambac  junctisque  fcruntur 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    V.  99 

Frontibus  et  longa  sulcant  vada  salsa  carina. 

Jamque  propinquabanfc  scopulo  metamquG  tenebant, 

Cum  princeps  medioque  Gyas  in  gurgitc  victor  160 

Kectorem  navis  compellat  voce  Menoeten  : 

"  Quo  tantum  mihi  dexter  abis  ^     Huc  dirige  gressum ! 

''  Litus  ama,  et  laevas  stringat,  sine,  palmula  cautes ; 

"  Altum  alii  teneant !  "     Dixit ;  sed  caeca  Menoetes 

Saxa  timens,  proram  pelagi  detorquet  ad  undas.  165 

"  Quo  diversus  abis  ?  "  iterum  "  Pete  saxa,  Menoete  1 " 

Cum  clamore  Gyas  revocabat,  et  ecce  Cloanthum 

Respicit  instantem  tergo  et  propiora  tenentem. 

Ille  inter  navemque  Gyae  scoi^ulosque  sonantes 

Eadit  iter  laevum  interior,  subitoque  priorem  170 

Praeterit,  et  metis  tenet  aequora  tuta  relictis. 

Tum  vero  exarsit  juveni  dolor  ossibus  ingens, 

Nec  lacrimis  caruere  genae,  segnemque  Menoeten, 

Oblitus  decorisque  sui  sociumque  salutis, 

In  mare  praecipitem  puppi  deturbat  ab  alta  ;  175 

Ipse  gubernaclo  rector  subit,  ipse  magister, 

Hortaturque  viros,  clavumque  ad  litora  torquet. 

At  gravis,  ut  fundo  vix  tandem  redditus  imo  est, 

Jam  senior,  madidaque  fluens  in  veste,  Menoetes 

Summa  petit  scopuli,  siccaque  in  rupe  resedit.  1 80 

Illum  et  labentem  Teucri  et  risere  natantem, 

Et  salsos  rident  revomentem  pectore  fluctus. 

Hic  laeta  extremis  spes  est  accensa  duobus, 

Sergesto  Mnestlieique,  Gyan  superare  morantem. 

Sergestus  capit  ante  locum,  scopuloque  propinquat,      185 

Nec  tota  tamen  ille  prior  praeeunte  carina : 

Pante  prior,  partem  rostro  premit  aemula  Pristis. 

At  media  socios  incedens  nave  per  ipsos 

Hortatur  Mnestheus :  "  Nunc,  nunc  insurgite  remis, 

"  Hectorei  socii,  Trojae  quos  sorte  suprema  190 

'*  Delegi  comites ;  nunc  illas  promite  vires, 


100  AENEIDOS    LIB.    V. 

"^  Nunc  auimos,  quibus  in  Gaetulis  syrtibus  usi 

"  louioque  mari  Maleaeque  sequacibus  undis. 

"  Non  jam  prima  peto  Mnestheus,  neque  vincere  certo- 

"  Quamquam  o  ...    Sed  superent,  quibus  boc,  Neptune,  195 

"  Extremos  pudeat  rediisse.  Hoc  vincite,  civos,    [dcdisti-; 

"  Et  prohibete  netas."     Olli  certamine  summo 

Procumbunt :  vastis  tremit  ictibus  aerea  puppis, 

Subtrabiturque  solum ;  tum  creber  aniielitus  artus 

Aridaque  ora  quatit,  sudor  iluit  undique  rivis,  200 

Attulit  ipse  viris  optatum  casus  honorem  : 

Namque  furens  animi  dum  proram  ad  saxa  suburguet 

Interior  spatioque  subit  Sergestus  iniquo, 

Infelix  saxis  in  procurrentibus  haesit. 

Concussae  cautes,  et  acuto  in  murice  remi  205 

Obnixi  crepuere,  illisaque  prora  pependit. 

Consurgunt  nautae  et  magno  clamore  morantur, 

Ferratasque  trudes  et  acuta  cuspide  contos 

Expediunt,  fractosque  legunt  in  gurgite  remos, 

At  laetus  Slnestheus,  successuque  acrior  ipso,  210 

Agmine  remorum  celeri  ventisquc  vocatis 

Prona  petit  maria  et  pelago  decurrit  aperto. 

Qualis  spelunca  subito  coramota  cohimba, 

Cui  domus  et  dulces  latebroso  in  pumice  nidi, 

Fertur  in  arva  volans  plausumque  exterrita  pennis       215 

Dat  tecto  ingentem,  mox  aere  la^^sa  quieto 

Eadit  iter  liquidum,  celeres  neque  commovet  ahia 

Sic  Mnestheus,  sic  ipsa  fnga  secat  ultima  Pristis 

Acquora,  sic  ilhxm  fert  impetus  ipse  volantem. 

Et  primum  in  scopulo  hictantem  deserit  alto  220 

Sergostum  brevibusque  vadis,  frustraque  vocantem 

Auxilia  et  fractis  discentem  currere  remis, 

Indc  Gyan  ipsamque  ingcnti  mole  Chimaeram 

Consequitur  :  cedit,  quoniam  spoliata  magistro  est. 

Solus  jamque  ipso  superest  in  finc  Cloanthus,  225 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    V.  lOJ 

Quem  petit  et  summis  annixus  viribus  urguet. 

Tum  vero  ingeminat  clamor,  cuuctique  sequentem 

Instigant  studiis,  resonatque  fragoribus  aetlier. 

Hi  jjroprium  decus  et  partum  indignantur  honorem 

Ni  teneant,  vitamque  volunt  pro  laude  pacisci ;  230 

Hos  successus  alit :  possunt,  quia  posse  videntur. 

Et  fors  aequatis  cepissent  praemia  rostris, 

Ni  palmas  ponto  tendens  utrasque  Cloanthus 

Fudissetque  preces,  divosque  in  vota  vocasset. 

"  Di,  quibus  imperium  est  pelagi,  quorum  aequora  cuiro, 

"  Vobis  laetus  ego  hoc  candentem  in  litore  taurum      236 

"  Constituam  ante  aras,  voti  reus,  extaque  salsos 

"  Porriciam  in  fluctus  et  vina  liquentia  fundam  !  " 

Dixit,  eumque  imis  sub  fiuctibus  audiit  omnis 

Nereidum  Phorcique  chorus  Panopeaque  virgo,  240 

Et  pater  ipse  manu  magna  Portunus  euntem 

Impulit :  illa  Noto  citius  vokicrique  sagitta 

Ad  terram  fugit,  et  portu  se  condidit  alto. 

Tum  satus  Anchisa,  cunctis  ex  more  vocatis, 

Victorem  magna  praeconis  voce  Cloanthum  245 

Declarat,  viridique  advelat  tempora  lauro, 

Muneraque  in  naves  ternos  optare  juvencos 

Vinaque,  et  argenti  magnum  dat  ferre  talentum. 

Ipsis  praecipuos  ductoribus  addit  honores  : 

Victori  chlamydem  auratam,  quam  plurima  circum    250 

Purpura  Maeandro  duplici  Meliboea  cucurrit ; 

Intextusque  puer  frondosa  regius  Ida 

Veloces  jaculo  cervos  cursuque  fatigat, 

Acer,  anhelanti  similis,  quem  praepes  ab  Ida 

Sublimem  pedibus  rapuit  Jovis  armiger  uncis  ;  255 

Longaevi  palmas  nequidquam  ad  sidera  tendunt 

Custodes,  saevitque  canum  latratus  in  auras. 

At  qui  deinde  locum  tenuit  virtute  secundum, 

Levibus  huic  hamis  consertam  auroque  trilicem 


102  AENEIDOS   LIB.    V. 

Loricam,  quam  Demoleo  detraxerat  ipse  260- 

Victor  apud  rapidum  Simoenta  sub  Ilio  alto, 

Donat  habere  viro,  dccus  et  tutamcn  in  armis. 

Vix  illam  famuli  Pliegeus  Sagarisque  ferebant 

Multiplicem,  connixi  humeris  ;  indutus  at  olim 

Demoleos  cursu  palantes  Troas  agebat.  265 

Tertia  dona  facit  geminos  ex  aere  lebetas, 

Cymbiaque  argento  perfecta  atque  aspera  signis. 

Jamque  adeo  donati  omnes  ojnbusque  superbi 

Puniceis  ibant  evincti  tempora  taeniis, 

Quum  saevo  e  scopulo  multa  vix  arte  revulsus,  270 

Amissis  remis  atque  ordine  debilis  uno, 

Irrisam  sine  bonore  ratem  Sergestus  agebat. 

Qualis  saepe  viae  deprensus  in  aggere  serpens, 

Aerea  quem  obliquum  rota  transiit  aut  gravis  ictu 

Seminecem  liquit  saxo  lacerumque  viator,  275 

Nequidquam  longos  fugiens  dat  corpore  tortus, 

Parte  ferox  ardensque  oculis  et  sibila  colla 

Arduus  attollens,  pars  vulnere  clauda  retentat 

Nixantem  nodis  seque  in  sua  membra  plicantem : 

Tali  remigio  navis  se  tarda  movebat,  280 

Vela  facit  tamen  et  velis  subit  ostia  plenis. 

Sergestum  Aeneas  promisso  munere  donat, 

Servatam  ob  navem  laetus  sociosque  rcductos. 

Olli  serva  datur  operum  haud  ignara  Mincrvae, 

Cressa  genus,  Pholoe,  geminique  sub  ubcre  nati.  285 

Hoc  pius  Aencas  misso  ccrtamine  tendit 
Gramineum  in  campum,  quem  collibus  undique  curvi;* 
Cingebant  silvae,  mediaque  in  valle  theatri 
Circus  erat :  quo  se  multis  cum  millibus  heros 
Consessu  mcdium  tulit  exstructoquc  rcsedit.  290 

Hic,  qui  forte  vclint  rapido  contendere  cursu, 
Invitat  pretiis  animos,  et  praemia  ponit. 
Undique  convcniunt  Teucri  raixtiquc  Sicam : 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    V.  103 

Nisus  et  Euryalus  primi, 

Euryalus  forma  insignis  viridique  juventa,  295 

Nisus  amore  pio  pueri.     Quos  deinde  secutus 

Regius  egregia  Priami  de  stirpe  Diores  ; 

Hunc  Salius  simul  et  Patron,  quorum  alter  Acarnan, 

Alter  ab  Arcadio  Tegeaeae  sanguine  gentis ; 

Tum  duo  Trinacrii  juvenes,  Helymus  Panopesque,        500 

Assueti  silvis,  comites  senioris  Acestae ; 

Multi  praeterea,  quos  fama  obscura  recondit. 

Aeneas  quibus  in  mediis  sic  deinde  locutus  : 

"  Accipite  haec  animis,  laetasque  advertite  mentes. 

"  Nemo  ex  boc  numero  mihi  non  donatus  abibit.  305 

"  Gnosia  bina  dabo  levato  lucida  ferro 

"  Spicula  caelatamque  argento  ferre  bipennem  : 

''  Omnibus  hic  erit  unus  honos.     Tres  praemia  primi 

"  Accipient,  flavaque  caput  nectentur  oliva  : 

"  Primus  equum  phaleris  insignem  victor  habeto  ;        310 

"  Alter  Amazoniam  pharetram  plenamc[ue  sagittis 

"  Threiciis,  lato  quam  circumplectitur  auro 

"  Balteus,  et  tereti  subnectit  fibula  gemma ; 

"  Tertius  Argolica  hac  galea  contentus  abito." 

Haec  ubi  dicta,  locum  capiunt,  signoque  repente  315 

Corripiunt  spatia  audito,  limenque  relinquunt, 

Effusi  nimbo  similes  ;  simul  ultima  signant. 

Primus  abit  longeque  ante  omnia  corpora  Nisus 

Emicat,  et  ventis  et  fulminis  ocior  alis ; 

Proximus  huic,  longo  sed  proximus  intervallo,  320 

Insequitur  Salius ;  spatio  post  deinde  relicto 

Tertius  Euryalus ; 

Euryalumque  Helymus  sequitur ;  quo  deinde  sub  ipso 

Ecce  volat,  calcemquc  terit  jam  calce  Diores, 

Incumbens  humero  ;  spatia  et  si  jjlura  supersint,         325 

Transeat  elapsus  prior,  ambiguumve  relinquat. 

Jamque  fere  spatio  extrcmo  fessique  sub  ipsaui 


'104  AENEIDOS    LIB.    V. 

Finem  adventabant,  levi  cum  sanguine  Nisus 

Labitur  infelix,  caesis  ut  forte  juvencis 

Fusus  humum  viridesque  super  madeiecerat  herbas.     330 

Hic  juvenis  jam  victor  ovans  vestigia  presso 

Haud  tenuit  titubata  solo,  sed  pronus  in  ipso 

Concidit  immundoque  fimo  sacroque  cruore. 

Non  tamen  Euryali,  non  ille  oblitus  amorum  : 

Nam  sese  opposuit  Salio  per  lubrica  surgens ;  -335 

Ille  autem  spissa  jacuit  revolutus  arena. 

Emicat  Euryalus,  et  munere  victor  amici 

Prima  tenet,  plausuque  volat  fremituque  secundo. 

Post  Helymus  subit,  et  nunc  tertia  palma  Diores. 

Hic  totum  caveae  consessum  iugentis  et  ora  340 

Prima  patrum  magnis  Salius  clamoiibus  implet, 

Ereptumque  dolo  reddi  sibi  poscit  honorem. 

Tutatur  favor  Euryalum,  lacrimaoque  decorae, 

Gratior  et  pulchro  veniens  in  corpore  virtus  ; 

Adjuvat  et  magna  proclamat  voce  Diores,  345 

Qui  subiit  palmae,  frustraque  ad  praemia  venit 

Ultima,  si  primi  Salio  reddantur  honores. 

Tum  pater  Aeneas  "  Vestra  "  inquit  "  munera  vobis 

"  Certa  manent,  pueri,  et  palmam  movet  ordine  nomo ; 

"  Me  liceat  casus  miserari  insontis  amici."  350 

Sic  fatus,  tergum  Gaetuli  immane  lconis 

Dat  Salio,  viUis  onerosum  atque  unguibus  aureis. 

Hic  Nisus, "  Si  tanta"  inquit  "  sunt  praemia  victis, 

"  Et  te  lapsorum  miseret;  quae  munera  Niso 

"  Digna  dabis,  primam  merui  qui  hiude  coronam,         355 

"  Ni  me,  quae  ct  Salium,  fortuna  inimica  tulisset  ? 

Et  simul  his  dictis  faciem  ostentabat  et  udo 

Turpia  membra  fimo.     Kisit  pater  optimus  oUi, 

Et  cHpeijm  efferri  jussit,  Didymaonis  artes, 

Neptuni  sacro  Danais  de  poste  rcfixum.  -  360 

Hoc  juvenem  cgregium  pracstanti  munere  donat. 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    V.  105 

Post,  ubi  confecti  ciirsus,  et  dona  peregit : 
"  Nunc,  si  cui  virtus  animusque  in  pectore  praesens, 
"  Adsit  et  evinctis  attollat  bracliia  palmis/' 
Sic  ait,  et  geminum  puguae  proponit  honorem:  365 

Victori  velatum  auro  vittisque  juvencum  ; 
Ensem  atque  insignem  galeam  solatia  victo. 
Nec  mora  ;  continuo  vastis  cum  viribus  effert 
Ora  Dares  magnoque  virum  se  murmure  tollit, 
Solus  qui  Paridem  solitus  contendere  contra,  370 

Idemque  ad  tumulum,  quo  maximus  occubat  Hector, 
Victorem  Buten  immani  corpore,  qui  se 
Bebrycia  veniens  Amyci  de  gente  ferebat, 
Perculit  et  fulva  moribundum  extendit  arena. 
Talis  prima  Dares  caput  altum  iu  proelia  tollit,  375 

Ostenditque  humeros  latos,  alternaque  jactat 
Brachia  protendens,  et  verberat  ictibus  auras. 
Quaeritur  buic  alius,  nec  quisquam  ex  agmine  tanto 
Audet  adire  virum  manibusque  inducere  cestus. 
Ergo  alacris,  cunctosque  putans  excedere  palma,  380 

Aeneae  stetit  ante  pedes,  nec  phira  moratus  ; 
Tum  laeva  taurum  cornu  tenet,  atque  ita  fatur : 
"  Nate  dea,  si  nemo  audet  se  credere  pugnae, 
"  Quae  finis  standi  ?  quo  me  decet  usque  teneri  ? 
"  Ducere  dona  jube."     Cuncti  simul  ore  fremebant      385 
Dardanidae,  reddique  viro  promissa  jubebant. 
Hic  gravis  Entellum  dictis  castigat  Acestes, 
Proximus  ut  viridante  toro  consederat  herbae  : 
"  Entelle,  heroum  quondam  fortissime  frustra, 
*'  Tantane  tam  patiens  nullo  certamine  tolli  390 

*'  Dona  sincs  ?     Ubi  nunc  nobis  deus  ille  magister, 
"  Nequidquam  memoratus  Eryx  ?  ubi  ftima  per  omnem 
*'  Trinacriam,  et  spolia  illa  tuis  pendentia  tectis.?" 
Ille  sub  haec  :  "  Non  laudis  amor,  nec  gloria  cessit 
"  Pulsa  metu  ;  sed  enini  gehdus  tardante  senecta        395 


i06  AENEIDOS    LIB.    V. 

"  Sanguis  hebet,  frigentque  effetae  in  corpore  vires. 
"  Si  mihi,  quae  quondam  fuerat,  quaque  improbus  iste 
''  Exsultat  fidens,  si  nunc  foret  illa  juventas  ; 
"  Haud  equidem  jiretio  inductus  pulchroque  juvcnco 
"  Venissem  :  nec  dona  moror."     Sic  deinde  locutus      40C 
In  medium  geminos  immani  pondere  cestus 
Projecit,  quibus  acer  Eryx  in  proelia  suetus 
Ferre  manum  duroque  intendere  brachia  tergo. 
Obstupuere  animi :  tantorum  ingentia  septem 
Terga  boum  plumbo  insuto  ferroque  rigebant.  405 

ALute  omnes  stupet  i^^se  Dares,  longeque  recusat ; 
Magnanimusque  Anchisiades  et  pondus  et  ipsa 
Huc  illuc  vinclorum  immensa  volumina  versat. 
Tum  senior  tales  referebat  pectore  voces : 
"  Quid,  si  quis  cestus  ipsius  et  Herculis  arma  *  410 

"  Vidisset,  tristemque  hoc  ipso  in  litore  pugnam  ? 
''  Haec  germanus  Eryx  quondam  tuus  arma  gerebat- 
"  Sanguine  cernis  adhuc  sparsoque  infecta  cerebro-. 
"  His  magnum  Alciden  contra  stetit ;  his  ego  suetus, 
"  Dum  mclior  vires  sanguis  dabat,  aemula  nccdum      415 
"  Temporibus  geminis  canebat  sparsa  senectus. 
"'  Sed  si  nostra  Dares  haec  Troius  arma  recusat, 
'  Idque  pio  sedet  Aeneae,  probat  auctor  Acestes  ; 
"  Aequemus  pugnas  :  Erycis  tibi  terga  remitto- 
"  Solve  metus-,  et  tu  Trojanos  exue  cestus,"  420 

Haec  fatus  duplicem  ex  humeris  rejecit  amictum, 
Et  magnos  membrorum  artus,  magna  ossa  lacertosque 
Exuit,  atque  ingens  media  consistit  arena. 
Tum  satus  Anchisa  cestus  pater  extulit  aequos, 
Et  paribus  palmas  amborum  inncxuit  armis.  425 

Constitit  in  digitos  extemplo  arrectus  uterque, 
Brachiaquc  ad  supcras  interritus  extulit  auras. 
Abduxere  retro  longe  capita  ardua  ab  ictu, 
Immiscentque  raanus  manibns,  pugnamque  lacessunt, 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    V.  107 

ille  pedum  melior  motu  fretusque  juventa,  430 

Hic  membris  et  mole  valens  ;  sed  tarda  trementi 

G-enua  labant,  vastos  quatit  aeger  anhelitus  artus. 

Multa  viri  nequidquam  inter  se  vulnera  jactant, 

Multa  cavo  lateri  ingeminant,  et  pectore  vastos 

Dant  sonitus,  erratque  aures  et  tempora  circum  435 

Crebra  manus,  duro  crepitant  sub  vulnere  malae. 

Stat  gravis  Entellus,  nisuque  immotus  eodem 

Corpore  tela  modo  atque  oculis  vigilantibus  exit ; 

Ille,  velut  celsam  oppugnat  qui  molibus  urbem 

Aut  montana  sedet  circum  castella  sub  armis,  440 

Nunc  hos  nunc  illos  aditus  omnemque  pererrat 

Arte  locum,  et  variis  assultibus  irritus  urguet. 

Ostendit  dextram  insurgens  Entellus  et  alte 

Extuiit ;  ille  ictum  venientem  a  vertice  velox 

Praevidit,  celerique  elapsus  corpore  cessit :  445 

Entellus  vires  in  ventum  effudit,  et  ultro 

Ipse  gravis  graviterque  ad  terram  pondere  vasto 

Concidit,  ut  quondam  cava  concidit  aut  Erymantho 

Aut  Ida  in  magna  radicibus  eruta  pinus. 

Consurgunt  studiis  Teucri  et  Trinacria  piibes  ;  450 

It  clamor  coelo,  primusque  accurrit  Acestes, 

Aequaevumque  ab  humo  miserans  attollit  amicum. 

At  non  tardatus  casu  neque  territus  heros 

Acrior  ad  pugnam  redit,  ac  vim  suscitat  ira. 

Tum  pudor  incendit  vires  et  conscia  virtus,  455 

Praecipitemque  *Daren  ardens  agit  aequore  toto, 

Nunc  dextra  ingeminans  ictus  nunc  ille  sinistra. 

Nec  mora,  nec  requies :  quam  multa  grandine  nimbi 

Culminibus  crepitant ;  sic  densis  ictibus  heros 

Creber  utraque  manu  pulsat  versatque  Dareta.  460 

Tura  pater  Aeneas  procedere  longius  iras 

Et  saevire  animis  Entellum  haud  passus  acerbis, 

Sed  finem  imposuit  pugnae,  fessumque  Darcta 


108  AENEIDOS    LIB.    V. 

Eripuit,  mulcens  dictis,  ac  talia  fotur : 

"  Infclix,  quae  tanta  animum  dementia  cepit  ?  465 

"  Non  vires  alias  convcrsaquc  numina  sentis  ? 

"  Cede  deo  !  "     Dixitque,  et  proelia  voce  diremit. 

Ast  illum  fidi  aequales,  genua  aegra  tralientem, 

Jactantemque  utroque  caput,  crassumque  cruorem 

Ore  cjectantem  mixtosque  in  sanguine  dentes,  470 

Ducunt  ad  naves,  galeamque  ensemque  vocati 

Accipiunt  ;  palmam  Entello  taurumque  relinquunt. 

Hic  victor,  superans  animis  tauroque  superbus, 

"  Nate  dea,  vosque  haec  "  inquit  "  cognoscite,  Teucri, 

"  Et  mihi  quae  fuerint  juvenali  in  corpore  vires,  475 

"  Et  qua  servetis  revocatum  a  morte  Dareta." 

Dixit,  et  adversi  contra  stetit  ora  juvenci, 

Qui  donum  adstabat  pugnae,  durosque  reducta 

Libravit  dextra  media  inter  cornua  cestus, 

Arduus,  effractoque  illisit  in  ossa  cerebro.  480 

Sternitur  exanimisque  tremens  procumbit  liumi  bos. 

Ille  super  tales  efifundit  pectore  voces  : 

"  Hanc  tibi,  Eryx,  meliorem  animam  pro  morte  Daretis 

"  Persolvo  :  hic  victor  cestus  artemque  repono.*' 

Protenus  Aeneas  celeri  certare  sagitta  485 

Invitat,  qui  forte  velint,  et  praemia  ponit, 
Ingentique  manu  malum  de  nave  Seresti 
Erigit,  et  volucrem  trajecto  in  fune  columbam, 
Quo  tendant  ferrum,  malo  suspendit  ab  alto. 
Convenere  viri,  dejectamque  aerea  sortem  490 

Acccpit  galea  ;  et  primus  clamore  secundo 
Hyrtacidae  ante  omnes  exit  locus  Hippocoontis ; 
Quem  modo  navaU  Mnestheus  certamine  victor 
Consequitur,  viridi  Mnestheus  evinctus  oliva. 
Tcrtius  Eurytion,  tuus,  o  clarissime,  fratcr,  495 

Pandare,  qui  quondam,  jussus  confundere  foedus, 
In  mcdios  telum  torsisti  prinins  Acluvos  : 


AENEIDOS   lilB.    V.  109 

Extremus  galeaque  ima  subsidit  Acestes, 

Ausus  et  ipse  manu  juvenum  tentare  laborem. 

Tum  validis  fiexos  incurvant  viribus  arcus  500 

Pro  se  quisque  viri,  et  depromunt  tela  pharetris. 

Primaque  per  coelum  nervo  stridente  sagitta 

Hyrtacidae  juvenis  volucres  diverberat  auras, 

Et  venit  adversique  infigitur  arbore  mali. 

Intremuit  malus,  timuitque  exterrita  pennis  505 

Ales,  et  ingenti  sonuerunt  omnia  plausu. 

Post  acer  Mncstheus  adducto  constitit  arcu,^ 

Alta  petens,  pariterque  oculos  telumque  tetendit; 

Ast  ipsam  miserandus  avem  contingere  ferro 

Non  valuit,  nodos  et  vincula  linea  rupit,  510 

Quis  innexa  pedem  malo  pendebat  ab  alto  : 

Illa  Notos  atque  atra  volans  in  nubila  fugit. 

Tum  rapidus,  jamdudum  arcu  contenta  j)arato 

Tela  tenens,  fratrem  Eurytion  in  vota  vocavit, 

Jam  vacuo  laetam  coelo  speculatus  ;  et  alis  515 

Plaudentem  nigra  figit  sub  nube  columbam. 

Decidit  exanimis,  vitamque  reliquit  in  astris 

Aetheriis,  fixamque  refcrt  delapsa  sagittam. 

Amissa  solus  palma  superabat  Accstes, 

Qui  tamen  aerias  telum  contendit  in  auras,  520 

Ostentans  artemque  pater  arcumque  sonantem: 

Hic  oculis  subitum  objicitur  magnoque  futurum 

Augurio  monstrum-docuit  post  exitus  ingens, 

Seraque  terrifici  cecinerunt  omina  vates-  : 

Namque  volans  liquidis  in  nubibus  arsit  arundo,  525 

Signavitque  viam  flammis,  tenuesque  recessit 

Consumta  in  ventos,  coelo  ceu  saepe  refixa 

Transcurrunt  crinemque  volantia  sidera  ducunt. 

Attonitis  haesere  animis,  Superosque  precati 

Trinacrii  Teucrique  viri ;  nec  maximus  omen  530 

Abnuit  Aeneas,  sed  laetum  amplexus  Acesten 


110  AENEIDOS    LIB.    V. 

Muneribus  curaulat  magnis,  ac  talia  fatur : 

"  Sume,pater  :  nam  te  voluit  rex  magnus  Olympi 

"  Talibus  auspiciis  exsortem'ducere  honorem. 

"  Ipsius  Ancliisae  longaevi  hoc  munus  habebis,  535 

"  Cratera  impressum  signis,  quem  Thracius  olim 

"  Anchisae  genitori  in  magno  munere  Cisseus 

'^  Ferre  sui  dederat  monumentum  et  pignus  amoris." 

Sic  fatus  cingit  viridanti  tempora  lauro, 

Et  primum  ante  omnes  victorem  appellat  Acesten.       540 

Nec  bonus  Eurytion  praelato  invidit  honori. 

Quamvis  solus  avem  coelo  dejecit  ab  alto. 

Proximus  ingreditur  donis,  qui  vincula  rupit ; 

Extremus,  volucri  qui  fixit  arundine  malum. 

At  pater  Aeneas,  nondum  certamine  misso,  545 

Custodem  ad  sese  comitemque  impubis  luli, 
Epytiden,  vocat  et  fidam  sic  fatur  ad  aurem : 
'•  Vade,  age,  et  Ascanio,  si  jam  puerile  paratum 
"  Agmen  habet  secum  cursusque  instruxit  equorum, 
"  Ducat  avo  turmas  et  sese  ostendat  in  armis,  550 

"  Dic,"  ait.     Ipse  omnem  longo  decederc  circo 
Infusum  popuhim  et  campos  jubet  esse  patentes. 
Incedunt  pueri,  pariterque  ante  ora  parentuin 
Erenatis  lucent  in  eq[uis,  quos  omnis  euntes 
Trinacriae  mirata  fremit  Trojaeque  juventus.  555 

Omnibus  in  morem  tonsa  coma  pressa  corona. 
Cornea  bina  ferunt  praefixa  hastilia  ferro, 
Pars  leves  humcro  pharetras  ;  it  pectore  summo 
Elexilis  obtorti  per  collum  circulus  auri. 
Trcs  equitum  numcro  turmae,  tcrnique  vagantur  560 

Ductores :  pueri  bis  seni  quemque  secuti  . 
Agmine  partito  fulgcnt  paribusquc  magistris. 
Una  acies  juvenum,  duxit  quam  parvus  ovantem 
Nomen  avi  referens  Priamus,  tua  clara,  Polite, 
Progenies,  auctura  Italos  :  quem  Thracius  albis  565 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    V.  111 

Portat  equus  bicolor  maculis,  vestigia  primi 

Alba  pedis  frontemque  ostentans  arduus  albam. 

Alter  Atys,  genus  unde  Atii  duxere  Latini, 

Parvus  Atys  pueroque  puer  diloctus  lulo. 

Extremus  formaque  ante  omnes  pulclier  lulus  57,0 

Sidonio  est  invectus  equo,  quem  candida  Dido 

Esse  sui  dcderat  monumentum  et  pignus  amoris. 

Cetera  Trinacriis  pubes  senioris  Acestae 

Fertur  equis. 

Excipiunt  plausu  pavidos,  gaudentque  tuentes  575 

Dardanidae,  veterumque  agnoscunt  ora  parentum. 

Postquam  omnem  laeti  consessum  oculosque  suorum 

Lustravere  in  equis  ;  signum  clamore  paratis 

Epytides  longe  dedit,  insonuitque  jQagello. 

Olli  discurrere  pares  atque  agmina  terni  •         580 

Deductis  solvere  choris,  rursusque  vocati 

Convertere  vias  infestaque  tela  tulere. 

Inde  alios  ineunt  cursus  aliosque  recursus 

Adversis  spatiis,  alternosque  orbibus  orbes 

Impediunt,  pugnaeque  cient  simulacra  sub  armis  ;       585 

Et  nunc  terga  fuga  nudant,  nunc  spicula  vertunt 

Infensi,  facta  pariter  nunc  pace  feruntur. 

Ut  quondam  Creta  fertur  Labyrintbus  in  alta 

Parietibus  textum  caecis  iter,  ancipitemque 

Mille  viis  babuisse  dolum,  qua  signa  sequendi  590 

EaUeret  indeprensus  et  irremeabilis  error : 

Haud  alio  Teucrum  nati  vestigia  cursu 

Impediunt,  texuntque  fugas  et  proelia  ludo, 

Delpbinum  similes,  qui  per  maria  bumida  nando 

Carpatbium  Libycumque  secant,  [hiduntque  pei'  undas.] 

Hunc  morem  cursus  atque  haec  certamina  primus        596 

Ascanius,  Longam  muris  quum  cingeret  Albam, 

Ketulit,  et  priscos  docuit  celebrare  Latinos, 

Quo  puer  ipse  modo,  secam  quo  Troia  pubes. 


112  AENEIDOS    LIB.    V. 

Albcani  docuere  siios  :  hinc  maxima  porro  600 

Accepit  Roma  et  patriiim  servavit  honorcm ; 
Trojaque  niiuc  p.ueri  Trojanum  dicitur  agmen. 
Hac  celebrata  tenus  sancto  certamina  patri. 

Hic  primum  Fortuna  fidom  mutata  novavit. 
Dum  variis  tumulo  referunt  solemnia  ludis  ;  605 

Irim  de  coelo  misit  Saturnia  Juno 
Iliacam  ad  classem,  ventosque  adspirat  eunti, 
Multa  movens,  necdum  antiquum  saturata  dolorem. 
Illa,  viam  celerans  per  mille  coloribus  arcum, 
Nulli  visa,  cito  decurrit  tramite  virgo.  610 

Conspicit  ingentem  concursum,  et  litora  lustrat, 
Desertosque  videt  portus  classemque  relictam. 
At  procul  in  sola  secretae  Troades  acta 
Amissum  Anchisen  flebant,  cunctaeque  profundum 
Pontuni  adspectabant  flentes.     Heu  tot  vada  fessis      615 
Et  tantum  supercsse  maris,  vox  omnibus  una. 
Urbem  orant :  taedet  pelagi  perferre  laborem. 
Ergo  iuter  medias  sese  haud  ignara  nocendi 
Conjicit,  et  faciemque  deae  vestemque  reponit : 
Fit  Beroe,  Tmarii  conjux  longaeva  Dorycli,  620 

Cui  genus  et  quondam  nomen  natique  fuissent; 
Ac  sic  Dardanidum  mediam  se  matribus  infert. 
"  0  miserae,  quas  non  manus"  inquit  "  Achaica  bello 
"  Traxerit  ad  letum  patriae  sub  mocnibus  !  o  gens 
"  Infelix,  cui  te  exitio  Fortuna  reservat .?  625 

"  Septima  post  Trojae  excidium  jam  vertitur  aestas, 
"  Quum  freta,  quum  terras  omnes,  tot  inhospita  saxa 
"  Sideraque  emensae  ferimur,  dum  per  mare  magnum 
*'  Italiam  sequimur  fugientem,  et  volvimur  undis. 
'•  Hic  Erycis  fines  fraterni  atque  hospes  Acestes :  630 

"  Quid  prohibet,  muros  jacere  et  dare  civibus  urbem  ? 
"  0  patria  et  rapti  nequidquam  ex  hoste  Penates, 
"  Nullane  jam  Trojae  diceutur  mocMia?  nusquam 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    V.  113 

"  Hectoreos  amnes,  Xantlium  et  Simoenta,  videbo  ? 

"  Quin  agite,  efc  mecum  infaustas  exurite  puppes  :        635 

"  Nam  mihi  Cassandrae  per  somnum  vatis  imago 

"  Ardentes  dare  visa  faces.     '  Hic  quaerite  Trojam  ; 

"  '  Hic  domus  est '  inquit  '  vobis.'     Jam  tempus  agi  res, 

"  Nec  tantis  mora  prodigiis.     En  quatuor  arae 

"  Iseptuno  :  deus  ipse  faces  animumque  nainistrat."     640 

Haec  memorans,  prima  infensum  vi  corripit  ignem, 

Sublataque  procul  dextra  connixa  coruscat 

Et  jacit.     Arrectae  mentes  stupefactaque  corda 

Iliadum.     Hic  una  e  multis,  quae  maxima  natu, 

Pyrgo,  tot  Priami  natorum  regia  nutrix :  645 

"  Non  Beroe  vobis,  non  baec  Rboeteia,  matres, 

"  Est  Dorycli  conjux  :  divini  signa  decoris 

"  Ardentesque  notate  oculos,  qui  s]3iritus  illi, 

"'  Qui  vultus,  vocisque  sonus,  et  gressus  eunti. 

"  Ipsa  egomet  dudum  Beroen  digressa  reliqui  650 

"  Aegram,  indignantem,  tali  quod  sola  careret 

'■  Munere,  nec  meritos  Anchisae  inferret  honores." 

Haec  eflPata.  '^ 

At  matres  primo  ancipites  oculisque  malignis 

Ambiguae  spectare  rates  miserum  inter  amorem  Q65 

Praesentis  terrae  fatisque  vocantia  regna : 

Quum  dea  se  paribus  per  coelum  sustulit  alis, 

Ingentemque  fuga  secuit  sub  nubibus  arcum. 

Tum  vero  attonitae  monstris  actaeque  furore 

Conclamant,  rapiuntque  focis  ponetralibus  ignem ;        660 

Pars  spoliant  aras,  frondem  ac  virgulta  facesque 

Conjiciunt.     Furit  immissis  Vulcanus  habenis 

Transtra  per  et  remos  et  pictas  abiete  puppes. 

Nuntius  Anchisae  ad  tumulum  cuneosque  thcatri 

Incensas  perfert  naves  Eumelus,  et  ipsi  665 

Eespiciunt  atram  in  nimbo  volitare  favillam  ; 

Primus  et  Ascanijs,  cursus  ut  laetus  equestres 


114  AENEIDOS   LIB.    V, 

Ducebat,  sic  acer  equo  turbata  petivit 

Castra,  nec  exanimes  possunt  retinere  magistri. 

"  Qiiis  furor  iste  novus  ?  quo  nunc,  quo  tenditis  "  inquit, 

"  Heu  miserae  cives  .^  non  bostem  inimicaque  castra    671 

"  Argivum,  vestras  spes  uritis.     En,  cgo  vester 

"  Ascanius  !  "     Galeam  ante  pedes  projecit  inanem, 

Qua  ludo  indutus  belli  simulacra  ciebat. 

Accelerat  simul  Aeneas,  simul  agmina  Teucrum.  G75 

Ast  illae  diversa  metu  per  litora  passim 

Diffugiunt,  silvasque,  et  sicubi  concava  furtim 

Saxa,  petunt :  piget  incepti,  lucisque  ;  suosque 

Mutatae  agnoscunt,  excussaque  pectore  Juno  cst. 

Sed  non  idcirco  flammae  atque  incendia  vires  680 

Indomitas  posuere  :  udo  sub  robore  vivit 

Stuppa  vomens  tardum  fumum,  lentusque  carinas 

Est  vapor,  et  toto  descendit  corpore  pestis  ; 

Nec  vires  beroum  infusaque  ilumina  prosunt. 

Tum  pius  Aeneas  bumeris  abscindere  vestem,  685 

Auxilioque  vocare  deos,  et  tendere  palmas : 

"  Jupiter  omnipotens,  si  nondum  exosus  ad  unum 

"  Trojanos,  si  quid  pietas  antiqua  labores 

"  Respicit  humanos,  da  flammam  evadere  classi 

"  Nunc,  pater,  et  tenues  Teucrum  res  eripe  leto  ;         690 

"  Vel  tu,  quod  superest,  infesto  fulmine  morti, 

"  Si  mereor,  demitte,  tuaque  bic  obrue  dextra." 

Vix  bacc  ediderat,  quum  effusis  imbribus  atra 

Tempestas  sine  more  furit,  tonitruque  trcmiscunt 

Ardua  terrarum  et  campi ;  ruit  aetbcre  toto  695 

Turbidus  imber  aqua  densisque  nigerrimus  Austris, 

Implenturquc  super  puppes,  semiusta  madescunt 

Robora  ;  restinctus  donec  vapor  omnis,  et  omnes, 

Quutuor  amissis,  servatae  a  peste  carinac. 

At  patcr  Aeneas,  casu  concussus  accrbo,  700 

Nunc  buc  ingentcs  nunc  ilhic  pcctore  curas 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    V.  Il5 

Mutabat  versans,  Siculisne  resideret  arvis, 

Oblitus  fatorum,  Italasne  capesseret  oras. 

Tum  senior  Nautes,  unum  Tritonia  Pallas 

Quem  docuit  multaque  insignem  reddidit  arte,  705 

Haec  responsa  dabat,  vel  quae  portenderet  ira 

Magna  deum,  vel  quae  fatorum  posceret  ordo. 

Isque  his  Aeneam  solatus  vocibus  infit : 

"  Nate  dea,  quo  fata  traliunt  retraliuntque,  sequamur ; 

"  Quidquid  erit,  superanda  omnis  fortuna  ferendo  est.  710 

^'  Est  tibi  Dardanius  divinae  stirpis  Acestes  : 

"  Hunc  cajDC  consiliis  socium  et  conjunge  volentem. 

"  Huic  trade,  amissis  superant  qui  navibus,  et  quos 

"  Pertaesum  magni  incepti  rerumque  tuarum  est ; 

"  Longaevosque  senes  ac  fessas  aequore  matres,  7lo 

"  Et  quidquid  tecum  invalidum  metuensque  pericli  est, 

"  Delige,  et  his  habeant  terris  sine  moenia  fessi : 

"  Urbem  appellabunt  permisso  nomine  Acestam." 

Talibus  incensus  dictis  senioris  amici, 

Tum  vero  in  curas  animo  diducitur  omnes.  720 

Et  nox  atra  polum  bigis  subvecta  tenebat : 

Visa  dehinc  coelo  facies  delapsa  parentis 

Anchisae  subito  tales  effundere  voces  : 

"  Nate,  mihi  vita  quondam,  dum  vita  manebat, 

"  Care  magis,  nate  Iliacis  exercite  fatis,  725 

"  Imperio  Jovis  huc  venio,  qui  classibus  ignem 

"  Depulit,  et  coelo  tandem  miseratus  ab  alto  est. 

"  Consiliis  pare,  quae  nunc  pulcherrima  Nautes 

"  Dat  senior  ;  lectos  juvenes,  fortissima  corda, 

"  Defer  in  Italiam  :  gens  dura  atque  aspera  cultu        730 

"  Debellanda  tibi  Latio  est.     Ditis  tamen  ante 

"  Infernas  accede  domos,  et  Averna  per  alta 

"  Congressus  pete,  nate,  meos-non  me  impia  namque 

'"Tartara  habent  tristesque  umbrae,  sed  amoena  piorum 

*'  Conciha  Elysiumque  colo-  ;  huc  casta  Sibylla  735 


116  AENEIDOS    LIB.    V. 

"  Nigrarum  multo  pecudum  te  sanguine  ducet. 

"  Tum  genus  omue  tuum  et,  quae  dentur  moenia,  disces. 

"  Jamque  vale :  torquet  medios  nox  humida  cursus, 

"  Et  me  saevus  equis  Orions  afflavit  anlielis." 

Dixerat,  et  tenues  fugit,  ceu  fumus,  in  auras.  740 

Aeneas  "  Quo  "  deinde  "  ruis  ?  quo  proripis  ?  "  inquit 

"  Quem  fugis,  aut  quis  te  nostris  complexibus  arcet  ?  " 

Haec  memorans  cinerem  et  sopitos  suscitat  ignes, 

Pergameumque  Larem  et  canae  penetralia  Vestae 

Farre  pio  et  plena  supplex  vcneratur  acerra.  745 

Extemplo  socios  primumque  arcessit  Acesten, 
Et  Jovis  imperium  et  cari  praecepta  parentis 
Edocet,  et  quae  nunc  animo  sententia  constet. 
Haud  mora  consiliis,  nec  jussa  recusat  Acestes. 
Transscribunt  urbi  matres,  populumque  volentem         750 
Deponunt,  animos  nil  magnae  laudis  egentes. 
Ipsi  transtra  novant,  flammisque  ambesa  reponunt 
Eobora  navigiis,  aptant  remosque  rudentesque, 
Exigui  numero,  sed  bello  vivida  virtus. 
Interea  Aeneas  urbem  dcsignat  aratro,  755 

Sortiturque  domos  ;  boc  Ilium  et  baec  loca  Trojam 
Esse  jubet.     Gaudet  regno  Trojanus  Acestes, 
Indicitque  forum  et  patribus  dat  jura  vocatis. 
Tum  vicina  astris  Erycino  in  vertice  sedes 
Fundatur  Veneri  Idaliae,  tumuloque  sacerdos  760 

Ac  lucus  late  sacer  additur  Ancliiseo. 
Jamque  dies  epulata  novem  gens  omnis,  et  aris 
Factus  honos  ;  placidi  straverunt  aequora  venti, 
Creber  et  adspirans  rursus  vocat  Auster  in  altum. 
Exoritur  procurva  ingens  per  litora  fletus  ;  763 

Complexi  inter  se  noctemque  diemque  morantur. 
Ipsae  jam  matres,  ipsi,  quibus  aspera  quondam, 
Visa  maris  facie^  et  non  tolerabile  nomen, 
Irc  vobmt  omncmque  fugae  pcrferrc  laborem. 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    V.  HV 

Quos  bonus  Aeneas  dictis  solatur  amicis,  770 

Et  consanguineo  lacrimans  commendat  Acestae. 
Tres  Eryci  vitulos,  et  Tempestatibus  agnam 
Caedere  deinde  jubet,  solvique  ex  ordine  funera. 
Ipse,  caput  tonsae  foliis  evinctus  olivae, 
Stans  procul  in  prora  pateram  tenet,  extaque  salsos     775 
Porricit  in  fluctus,  ac  vina  liqueutia  fundit. 
Prosequitur  surgens  a  puppi  ventus  euntes ; 
Certatim  socii  feriunt  mare  et  aequora  verrunt. 
At  Venus  interea  Neptunum  exercita  curis 
Alloquitur,  talesque  effundit  pectore  questus  :  780 

"  Junonis  gravis  ira  nec  exsaturabile  pectus 
^'  Cogunt  me,  JSTeptuDe,  preces  descendere  in  omnes, 
"  Quam  nec  longa  dies,  i)ietas  nec  mitigat  uUa ; 
"  Nec  Jovis  imperio  fatisque  infracta  quiescit. 
"  Non  media  de  gente  Phrygum  exedisse  nefandis        785 
"  Urbem  odiis  satis  est,  nec  poenam  traxe  per  omnem ; 
"  Picliquias  Trojae,  cineres  atque  ossa  peremtae 
"  Insequitur :  causas  tanti  sciat  illa  furoris. 
"  Ipse  mihi  nuper  Libycis  tu  testis  in  undis, 
"  Quam  molcm  subito  excierit :  maria  omnia  coelo       790 
""  Miscuit,  Aeoliis  nequidquam  freta  procellis, 
"  In  regnis  hoc  ausa  tuis. 
"  Per  scelus  ecce  etiam  Trojanis  matribus  actis 
"  Exussit  foede  puppes,  et  classe  subegit 
"  Amissa  socios  ignotae  linquere  terrac.  795 

"  Quod  superest,  oro,  liceat  dare  tuta  per  undas 
"  Vela  tibi,  liceat  Laurentem  attingere  Thybrim, 
"  Si  concessa  peto,  si  dant  ea  moenia  Parcae." 
Tum  Saturnius  haec  domitor  maris  edidit  alti  : 
"  Fas  omne  est,  Cytherea,  mcis  te  iidere  regnis,  800 

"  Unde  genus  ducis.     Merui  quoque  :  saepe  furores 
"  Compressi  et  rabiem  tantam  coelique  marisque ; 
■''  Nec  minor  in  tenis-Xanthum  Simoentaque  testor- 


118  AENEIDOS   LIB.    V. 

"  Acneae  mihi  cura  tai.     Qimm  Troia  Acliillcs 

"  Exanimata  sequens  impingeret  agmina  muris^  805 

"  MiUia  multa  claret  leto,  gemerentque  repleti 

"  Amnes,  nec  reperire  viam  atque  evolvere  posset 

"  In  mare  se  Xanthus  ;  Pelidae  tunc  ego  forti 

'•'  Congressum  Aenean,  iiec  dis  nec  viribus  aequis, 

•'  Nube  cava  rapui,  cuperem  quum  vertere  ab  imo        810 

"  Structa  meis  manibus  perjurae  moenia  Trojae. 

"  Nunc  quoque  mens  eadem  perstat  mihi:  pelle  timorem  : 

"  Tutus,  quos  optas,  portus  accedet  Averni. 

"  Unus  erit  tantum,  amissum  quem  gurgite  quaeret : 

"  Unum  pro  multis  dabitur  caput."  815 

His  ubi  laeta  deae  permulsit  pectora  dictis, 

Jungit  equos  auro  genitor,  spumantiaque  addit 

Frena  feris,  manibusque  omnes  effundit  habenas. 

Caeruleo  per  summa  levis  volat  aequora  curru  : 

Subsidunt  undae,  tumidumque  sub  axe  tonanti  820 

Sternitur  aequor  aquis,  fugiunt  vasto  aethere  nimbi. 

Tum  variae  comitum  facies,  immania  cete, 

Et  senior  Glauci  chorus,  Inousque  Palaemon, 

Tritonesque  citi,  Phorcique  exercitus  omnis  ; 

Lacva  tenet  Thetis,  et  Melite,  Panopeaque  virgo,         825 

Nesaee,  Spioque,  Thaliaque  Cymodoceque. 

Hic  patris  Aeneae  suspensam  blanda  vicissim 
Gaudia  pertentant  mentem  :  jubet  ocius  omnes 
Attolli  malos,  intendi  brachia  veiis. 
Uua  omnes  fecere  pedem,  pariterque  sinistros,  830 

Nunc  dextros  solvere  siims  ;  una  ardua  torquent 
Cornua  detorquentquc  :  fcrunt  sua  fiamina  classem. 
Princeps  ante  omnes  densum  Palinurus  agebat 
Agmen  :  ad  hunc  alii  cursum  contendere  jussi. 
Jamque  fere  mediam  cocli  nox  lumiida  metam  835 

Contigerat,  placida  laxabant  membra  quiete 
Sub  remis  fusi  per  dura  sedilia  nautae  : 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    V.  119 

Quum  levis  aetheriis  delapsus  Somnus  ab  astris 

Aera  dimovit  tenebrosum  et  dispulit  umbras, 

Te,  Palinure,  petens,  tibi  somnia  tristia  portans  840 

Insonti ;  puppique  deus  consedit  in  alta, 

Phorbanti  similis,  funditque  has  ore  loquelas : 

"  laside  Palinure,  ferunt  ipsa  aequora  classem, 

"  Aequatae  spirant  aurae,  datur  hora  quieti : 

''  Pone  caput,  fessosque  oculos  furare  labori ;  845 

"  Ipse  ego  paullisper  pro  te  tua  munera  inibo." 

Cui  vix  attollens  Pahnurus  lumina  fatur  : 

"  Mene  salis  placidi  vultum  fluctusque  quietos 

"  Ignorare  jubes  ?  mene  huic  confidere  monstro  ? 

''  Aenean  credam  quid  enim,  fallacibus  auris  850 

"  Et  coeli  toties  deceptus  fraude  sereni  ?  " 

Talia  dicta  dabat,  clavumque  afiixus  et  haerens 

Nusquam  amittebat,  oculosque  sub  astra  tenebat. 

Ecce  deus  ramum  Lethaeo  rore  madentem 

Vique  soporatum  Stygia  super  utraque  quassat  855 

Tempora,  cunctantique  natantia  lumina  solvit. 

Vix  primos  inopina  quies  laxaverat  artus  ; 

Et  super  incumbens,  cum  puppis  parte  revulsa 

Cumque  gubernaclo,  liquidas  prqjecit  in  undas 

Praecipitem,  ac  socios  nequidquam  saepe  vocantem.     860 

Ipse  volans  tenues  se  sustulit  ales  ad  auras. 

Currit  iter  tutum  non  secius  aequore  classis, 

Promissisque  patris  Neptuni  interrita  fertur. 

Jamque  adeo  scopulos  Sirenum  advecta  subibat, 

Difficiles  quondam  multorumque  ossibus  albos;  865 

Tum  rauca  adsiduo  longe  sale  saxa  sonabant : 

Quum  pater  amisso  fluitantem  errare  magistro 

Sensit,  et  ipse  ratem  nocturnis  rexit  in  undis, 

Multa  gemens,  casuque  animum  concussus  amici. 

"  0  nimium  coelo  et  pelago  coniise  sereno,  870 

"  Nudus  in  ignota,  Palinure,  jacebis  arena." 


P.  VIEGILII   MAROXIS 

AENEIDOS 

LIBER  SEXTUS. 


Sic  fatur  lacrimans,  classique  immittit  habenas, 

Et  tandem  Euboicis  Cumarum  allabitur  oris. 

Obvertunt  pelago  proras  ;  tum  dente  tenaci 

Ancora  fundabat  naves,  et  litora  curvae 

Praetexunt  puppes.     Juvenum  manus  emicat  ardens      5 

Litus  in  Hesperium  :  quaerit  pars  semina  flammae 

Abstrusa  in  venis  silicis ;  pars  densa  ferarura 

Tecta  rapit,  silvas,  inventaque  flumina  monstrat. 

At  pius  Aeneas  arccs,  quibus  altus  Apollo 

Praesidet,  horrendaeque  procul  secreta  Sibyllae,  10 

Antrum  immane,  petit,  magnam  cui  mentem  animumque 

Delius  inspirat  vates  aperitque  futura. 

Jam  subeunt  Triviae  lucos  atque  aurea  tecta. 

Daedalus,  ut  fama  cst,  fugiens  Minoia  regna, 
Praepetibus  pennis  ausus  se  credere  coelo,  15 

Insuetum  per  iter  gelidas  enavit  ad  Arctos, 
Chalcidicaque  levis  tandem  super  adstitit  arce. 
E-edditus  his  primum  terris,  tibi,  Phoebe,  sacravit 
Remigium  alarum,  posuitque  immania  templa. 
In  foribus  letum  Androgco  ;  tum  pendere  poenas  20 

Cecropidae  jussi-miserum  !-septena  quotannis 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    VI.  121 

Corpora  natomm  :  stat  ductis  sortibiis  urna. 

Contra  elata  mari  respondet  Gnosia  tellus : 

Hic  crudelis  amor  tauri,  suppostaque  furto 

Pasiphae,  mixtumque  genus  prolesque  biformis,  25 

Minotaurus,  inest,  Veneris  monumenta  nefandae  ; 

Hic  labor  ille  domus,  et  inextricabilis  error  ; 

Magnum  reginae  sed  enim  miseratus  amorem 

Daedalus,  ipse  dolos  tecti  ambagesque  resolvit, 

Caeca  regens  filo  vestigia.     Tu  quoque  magnam  30 

Partem  opere  iu  tanto,  sineret  dolor,  Icare,  liaberes : 

Bis  conatus  erat  casus  effingere  in  auro  ; 

Bis  patriae  cecidere  manus.     Quin  protenus  omnia 

Perlegerent  oculis,  ni  jam  praemissus  Acbates 

Afforet,  atque  una  Phoebi  Triviaeque  sacerdos,  35 

Deipbobe  Glauci,  fatur  quae  talia  regi : 

"  Non  hoc  ista  sibi  tempus  spectacula  poscit ; 

"  Nunc  grege  de  intacto  septem  mactare  juvencos 

"  Praestiterit,  totidem  lectas  de  more  bidentes." 

Talibus  affata  Aenean-nec  sacra  morantur  40 

Jussa  viri-Teucros  vocat  alta  in  templa  sacerdos, 
Excisum  Euboicae  latus  ingens  rupis  in  antrum  : 
Quo  lati  ducunt  aditus  centum,  ostia  centum  ; 
Unde  ruunt  totidem  voces,  responsa  Sibyllae. 
Ventum  erat  ad  limen,  quum  virgo  "  Poscere  fata  45 

"  Tempus  "  ait :  "  deus,  ccce,  deus  !  "     Cui,  talia  fanti 
Ante  fores,  subito  non  vultus,  non  color  unus, 
Non  comtae  mansere  comae  ;  sed  pectus  anhelum, 
Et  rabie  fera  corda  tument,  majorque  videri, 
Nec  mortale  sonans  :  aiflata  est  numine  quando  50 

Jam  propriore  dei.     "  Cessas  in  vota  precesque, 
"  Tros  "  ait  "  Aenea  ?  cessas  ?  neque  enim  ante  dehiscent 
"  Attonitae  magna  ora  domus  ; "  et  talia  fata 
Conticuit.     Gelidus  Teucris  per  dura  cucurrit 
Ossa  tremor,  funditque  preces  rex  pectore  ab  imo  :         55 
6 


122  AENEIDOS    LIB.    VI. 

"  PhoeLe,  graves  Trojae  sempcr  miserate  labores, 

"  Dardana  qui  Paridis  direxti  tela  manusqae 

"  Corpus  in  Aeacidae,  inagnas  obeuntia  terras 

"  Tot  maria  intravi  duce  tc,  penitusque  repostas 

"  Massylum  gentes  praetentaque  Sj-rtibus  arva  ;  60 

"  Jam  tandem  Italiae  fugientis  prcndimus  oras  : 

"  Hac  Trojana  tenus  fuerit  fortuna  secuta  ! 

"  Vos  quoque  Pergameae  jam  fas  est  parcere  genti, 

'■'  Dique  deaeque  omnes,  quibus  obstitit  Ilium  et  ingens 

"  Gloria  Dardaniae.     Tuque,  o  sanctissima  vates,  Q5 

"  Praescia  venturi,  da-non  indebita  posco 

"  Resna  meis  fatis-Latio  considere  Teucros 

"  Errantesque  deos  agitataque  numina  Trojae. 

"  Tum  Phoebo  et  Triviae  solido  de  marmore  templum 

"  Instituam  festosque  dies  de  nomine  Phoebi.  70 

"  Te  quoque  magna  manent  regnis  penetralia  nostris  : 

"  Hic  ego  namque  tuas  sortes  arcanaque  fata, 

"  Dicta  meae  genti,  ponam,  lectosque  sacrabo, 

"  Alma,  viros.     Foliis  tantum  ne  carmina  manda, 

"  Ne  turbata  volent  rapidis  ludibria  ventis ;  75 

"  Ipsa  canas  oro."     Finem  dedit  ore  loquendi. 

At,  Phoebi  nondum  patiens,  immanis  in  antro 

Bacchatur  vates,  magnum  si  pectore  possit 

Excussisse  deum :  tanto  magis  ille  fatigat 

Os  rabidum,- fera  corda  domans,  fingitque  premendo.      80 

Ostia  jamque  domus  patuere  ingentia  centum 

Sponte  sua,  vatisque  ferunt  responsa  per  auras : 

"  0  tandem  magnis  pelagi  defunctc  periclis- 

"  Sed  terrae  graviora  manent-,  in  regna  Lavini 

'^  Dardanidac  venient :  mitte  hanc  de  pectore  curam  ;  85 

"  Sed  non  et  venisse  volent.     Bolla,  horrida  beUa, 

"  Et  Thybrim  multo  spumantem  sanguine  cerno. 

"  Non  Simois  tibi  nec  Xanthus  nec  Dorica  castra 

"  Defuerint :  alius  Latio  jam  partus  Achilles, 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    VI,  123 

"  Natus  et  ipse  dea  ;  nec  Teucris  addita  Juno  90 

"  Usquam  aberit,  quum  tu  supplex  in  rebus  egenis 

"  Quas  gentes  Italum  aut  quas  non  oravcris  urbes ! 

"  Causa  mali  tanti  conjux  iterum  liospita  Teucris, 

"  Externique  iterum  thalami. 

"  Tu  ne  cede  malis,  sed  contra  audenlior  ito,  95 

"  Quam  tua  te  Fortuna  sinet.     Via  prima  salutis, 

"  Quod  minime  reris,  Graia  pandetur  ab  urbc." 

Talibus  ex  adyto  dictis  Cumaea  Sibylla 

Horrendas  canit  ambages,  antroque  remugit, 

Obscuris  vera  involvens  :  ea  frena  furenti  100 

Concutit  et  stimulos  sub  pectore  vertit  ApoUo. 

Ut  primum  cessit  furor  et  rabida  ora  quierunt ; 

Incipit  Aeneas  lieros  :  "  Non  ulla  laborum, 

"  0  virgo,  nova  mi  facies  inopinave  surgit : 

"  Omnia  praecepi  atque  animo  mecum  ante  peregi.      105 

"  Unum  oro  :  quando  hic  inferni  janua  regis 

"  Dicitur  et  tenebrosa  palus  Acheronte  refuso ; 

"  Ire  ad  conspectum  cari  genitoris  et  ora 

"  Contingat :  doceas  iter,  et  sacra  ostia  pandas. 

"  lUum  ego  per  flammas  et  mille  sequentia  tela  110 

"  Eripui  his  humeris,  medioque  ex  hoste  recepi ; 

"  Ille,  meum  comitatus  iter,  maria  omnia  mecum 

"  Atque  omnes-  pelagique  minas  coelique  ferebat, 

"  Invalidus,  vires  ultra  sortemque  senectae  ; 

".Quin,  ut  te  supplex  peterem  et  tua  limina  adirem,    115 

"  Idem  orans  mandata  dabat.     Gnatique  patrisque, 

"  Alma,  precor,  miserere-  :  potes  namque  omnia,  nec  te 

"  Nequidquam  lucis  Hecate  praefecit  Avernis-  :  ' 

"  Si  potuit  Manes  arcessere  conjugis  Orpheus, 

"  Threicia  fretus  cithara  lidibusque  canoris  ;  120 

"  Si  fratrem  PoUux  alterna  morte  redemit, 

"  Itque  reditque  viam  toties.     Quid  Thesea  magnum, 

"  Quid  memorem  Alciden  ?  Et  mi  genus  ab  Jove  summo.'' 


124  AENEIDOS    LIB.    VI, 

Talibus  orabat  dictis,  arasque  tenebat, 
Quuni  sic  orsa  loqui  vates  :  "  Sate  sanguine  divum,     125 
""  Tros  Anchisiade,  facilis  de.scensus  Averno  : 
"  Noctcs  atque  dics  j)atet  atri  janua  Ditis ; 
'"  Sed  revocare  gradum  superasque  evadere  ad  auras, 
"  Hoc  opus,  hic  labor  est :  pauci,  quos  aequus  amavit 
"  Jupiter  aut  ardens  evexit  ad  aethera  virtus,  130 

"  Dis  geniti  potuere.     Tenent  media  omnia  silvae, 
"  Cocytosque  sinu  labens  circumvenit  atro. 
"  Quod  si  tantus  amor  menti,  si  tanta  cupido  est 
"  Bis  Stygios  innare  lacus,  bis  nigra  videre 
"  Tartara,  et  insano  juvat  indulgere  labori ;  135 

"  Accipe,  quae  peragenda  prius.     Latet  arbore  opaca 
"  Aureus  et  foliis  et  lento  vimine  ramus, 
"  Junoni  infernae  dictus  sacer ;  hunc  tcgit  omnis 
"  Lucus,  et  obscuris  claudunt  convallibus  umbrae. 
"  Sed  non  ante  datur  telluris  operta  subire,  140 

"  Auricomos  quam  qui  decerpserit  arbore  fetus  : 
"  Hoc  sibi  pulchra  suum  ferri  Proserpina  munus 
"  Instituit.     Primo  avulso  non  deficit  alter 
"  Aureus,  et  simiH  frondescit  virga  metallo. 
"  Ergo  alte  vestiga  oculis,  et  rite  repertum  145 

"  Carpe  manu  :  namque  ipse  volens  facilisque  sequetur, 
"  Si  te  fata  vocant ;  aliter  non  viribus  ullis 
"  Vincere,  nec  duro  poteris  convellere  ferro. 
'  Practerea  jacet  exanimum  tibi  corpus  amici- 
"  Ileu  nescis  !-,  totamque  incestat  fimere  classem,        150 
"  Dum  consulta  pctis  nostroquc  iu  limine  pendcs. 
"  Sedibus  hunc  refer  ante  suis  et  conde  sepulcro. 
"  Duc  nigras  pecudes :  ea  prima  piacula  sunto. 
"  Sic  dcmum  lucos  Stygis  et  regna  invia  vivis 
"  Adspicies."     Dixit,  pressoque  obmutuit  ore.  155 

Aeneas  maesto  defixus  lumina  vultu 
Ingreditur,  linquens  antrum,  caecosque  volutat 


AENEIDOS   LIB,    VI.  125 

Erentus  animo  sccum.     Cui  fidus  Achates 

It  comes  et  paribus  curis  vestigia  figit. 

Mulfca  inter  sese  vario  sermone  sercbant,  160 

Quem  socium  exanimum  vates,  quod  corpus  humandum 

Diceret.     Atque  illi  Misenum  in  litore  sicco, 

Ut  venere,  vident  indigna  morte  peremtum, 

Misenum  Aeoliden,  quo  non  praestantior  alter 

Aere  ciere  viros,  Martemque  accendere  cantu.  165 

Hectoris  hic  magni  fuerat  comes  ;  Hectora  circuni 

Et  lituo  pugnas  insignis  obibat  et  liasta. 

Postquam  illum  vita  victor  spoliavit  Achilles ; 

Dardanio  Aeneae  sese  fortissimus  heros 

Addiderat  socium,  non  inferiora  secutus.  170 

Sed  tum,  forte  cava  dum  personat  aequora  concha, 

Demens,  et  cantu  vocat  in  certamina  divos, 

Aemulus  exceptum  Triton-si  credere  dignum  est- 

Inter  saxa  virum  spumosa  immerserat  unda. 

Ergo  omnes  maguo  circum  cLamore  fremebant,  175 

Praecipue  pius  Aeneas;  tum  jussa  Sibyllae- 

Haud  mora-festinant  flentes,  aramque  sepulcri 

Congerere  arboribus  coeloque  educere  certant. 

Itur  in  antiquam  silvam,  stabula  alta  ferarum : 

Procumbunt  piceae,  sonat  icta  securibus  ilex,  180 

Fraxineaeque  trabes  cuneis  et  fissile  robur 

Scinditur,  advolvunt  ingeutes  montibus  ornos. 

Nec  non  Aeneas  opera  inter  talia  primus 

Hortatur  socios,  paribusque  accingitur  armis, 

Atque  haec  ipse  suo  tristi  cum  corde  volutat,  185 

Adspectans  silvam  immensam,  et  sic  forte  precatur. 

"  Si  nunc  se  nobis  ille  aureus  arbore  ramus 

"  Ostendat  nemore  in  tanto  :  quando  omnia  vere 

"  Heu  nimium  de  te  vates,  Misene,  locuta  est," 

Vix  ea  fatus  erat,  geminae  quum  forte  columbae  19C 

Ipsa  sub  ora  viri  coelo  vcnere  volantes, 


126  AENEIDOS    LIB.    VI. 

Et  viridi  sedere  solo,     Tiim  maximus  heros 
Maternas  agnoscit  aves,  laetusque  precatur  : 
"  Este  duces,  o,  si  qua  via  est,  cursumque  per  auras 
"  Dirigite  in  lucos,  ubi  pinguem  dives  opacat  195 

"  Ramus  liumum.     Tuque,  o,  dubiis  ne  defice  rebus, 
'•'  Diva  parens  !  "     Sic  effatus  vcstigia  pressit, 
Observans,  quae  signa  ferant,  quo  tendere  pergant. 
Pascentes  illae  tantum  prodire  volando, 
Quantum  acie  possent  oculi  servare  sequentum.  200 

Inde  ubi  venere  ad  fauces  graveolentis  Averni, 
Tollunt  se  celeres,  liquidumque  per  aera  lapsae 
Sedibus  optatis  gemina  super  arbore  sidunt, 
Discolor  unde  auri  per  ramos  aura  refulsit. 
Quale  solet  silvis  brumali  frigore  viscum  205 

Fronde  virere  nova,  quod  non  sua  seminat  arbos, 
Et  croceo  fetu  teretcs  circumdare  truncos : 
Talis  erat  species  auri  frondentis  ojjaca 
Uice,  sic  leni  crepitabat  bractea  vento. 
Corripit  Aeneas  extemplo,  avidusque  refringit  210 

Cunctantem,  et  vatis  portat  sub  tecta  Sibyllae. 
Nec  minus  interea  Misenum  in  litore  Teucri 
Flebant,  et  cineri  ingrato  suprema  ferebant. 
Principio  pinguem  taedis  et  robore  secto 
Ingcntem  struxere  pyram,  cui  frondibus  atris  215 

Intexunt  latera,  et  ferales  ante  cupressos 
Constituunt,  decorantque  super  fulgentibus  armis. 
Pars  calidos  latices  et  abena  undantia  flammis 
Expediunt,  corpusque  lavant  frigentis  et  unguunt. 
Fit  gemitus ;  tum  membra  toro  defleta  rcponunt,         22C 
Purjiureasque  super  vestes,  velamina  nota, 
Conjiciunt.     Pars  ingenti  subiere  feretro- 
Triste  ministerium-,  ct  subjectam  more  parentum 
Aversi  tenuere  facem.     Congesta  eremantur 
Turea  dona,  dapes,  fuso  cratcres  olivo.  ,       225 


AENEIDOS   LIE.    VI.  127 

Postquam  collapsi  cineres,  et  flamma  quievit ; 

Reliquias  vino  et  bibulam  lavere  favillam, 

Ossaque  lecta  cado  texit  Coiynaeus  aheno. 

Idem  ter  socios  pura  circumtulit  unda, 

Spargens  rore  levi  et  ramo  felicis  olivae,  230 

Lustravitque  viros,  dixitque  novissima  verba. 

At  pius  Aeneas  ingenti  mole  sepulcrum 

Imponit,  suaque  arma  viro,  remumque  tubamque, 

Monte  sub  aerio,  ^ui  nunc  Misenus  ab  iUo 

Dicitur,  aeternumque  tenet  per  saecula  nomen.  235 

His  actis  propere  essequitur  praecepta  Sibyllae. 
Spelunca  alta  fuit  vastoque  immanis  hiatu, 
Scrupea,  tuta  lacu  nigro  nemorumque  tenebris, 
Quam  super  haud  ullae  poterant  impune  volantes 
Tendere  iter  pennis :  talis  sese  halitus  atris  240 

Faucibus  effundens  supera  ad  convexa  ferebat  ; 
[Unde  locum  Graii  dixerunt  nomine  Aornon.] 
Quatuor  hic  primum  nigrantes  terga  juvencos 
Constituit,  frontique  invergit  vina  sacerdos, 
Et,  summas  carpens  media  inter  cornua  setas,  245 

Ignibus  imponit  sacris,  libamina  prima, 
Voce  vocans  Hecaten  coeloque  Ereboque  potentem. 
Supponunt  alii  cultros,  tepidumque  cruorem 
Suscipiunt  pateris.     Ipse  atri  velleris  agnam 
Aeneas  matri  Eumenidum  magnaeque  sorori  250 

Ense  ferit,  sterilemque  tibi,  Proserpina,  vaccam ; 
Tum  Stygio  regi  nocturnas  inchoat  aras, 
Et  solida  imponit  taurorum  viscera  flammis, 
Pingue  super  oleum  infundens  ardentibus  extis. 
Ecce  autem,  primi  sub  himina  solis  et  ortus,  255 

Sub  pedibus  mugire  solum  et  juga  coepta  moveri 
Silvarura,  visaeque  canes  uhilare  per  umbram, 
Adventante  dea.     "  Procul  o,  procul  este,  profani," 
Conclamat  vates  "  totoque  absistite  hico  ; 


128  AENEIDOS    LIB.    VI. 

"  Tuque  invade  viam,  vaginaque  eripe  ferrum :  260 

"  Nunc  animis  opus,  Aenea,  nunc  pectore  firmo.'' 
Tantum  efFata,  furcns  antro  se  immisit  aperto ; 
Ille  ducem  baud  timidis  vadentem  passibus  aequat. 

Di,  quibus  imperium  est  animarum,  Umbraeque  silentes, 
Et  Chaos  et  Pblegetbon,  loca  nocte  tacentia  late,         265 
t^it  mibi  fas  audita  loqui ;  sit  numine  vestro 
•Pandere  res  alta  terra  et  caligine  mersas. 
Ibant  obscuri  sola  sub  nocte  per  umbraiti, 
Perque  domos  Ditis  vacuas  et  inania  regna : 
Quale  per  incertam  lunam  sub  luce  maligna  270 

Est  iter  in  silvis,  ubi  coelum  condidit  umbra 
Jupiter,  et  rebus  nox  abstulit  atra  colorem. 
Vestibulum  ante  ipsum  primisque  in  faucibus  Orci 
Luctus  et  ultrices  posuere  cubilia  Curae, 
Pallentesque  babitant  Morbi  tristisque  Senectus,  275 

Et  Metus  et  malesuada  Fames  ac  turpis  Egestas, 
Terribiles  visu  formae,  Letumque  Labosque  ; 
Tum  consanguineus  Leti  Sopor,  et  mala  mentis 
Gaudia,  mortiferumque  adverso  in  limine  Bellum 
Ferreique  Eumenidum  tbalami,  et  Discordia  demens,  280 
Vipereum  crinem  vittis  innexa  cruentis. 
In  medio  ramos  annosaque  brachia  pandit 
Ulmus  opaca,  ingens,  quam  sedem  Somnia  vulgo 
Vana  tenere  ferunt,  foliisque  sub  omnibus  baerent. 
Multaque  praeterea  variarum  monstra  ferarum,  285 

Ccntauri,  in  foribus  stabubmt,  ScylLaeque  biformes, 
Et  centumgeminus  Briareus,  ac  bellua  Lernae 
Horrendum  stridens,  flammisque  armata  Cbimacra, 
Gorgones  Harpyiaeque  et  forma  tricorporis  umbrae 
Corripit  bic  subita  trepidus  formidine  ferrum  290 

Aeneas,  strictamque  aciem  venientibus  offert ; 
Et,  ni  docta  comes  tenucs  sine  corpore  vitas 
Admoneat  volitare  cava  sub  imagine  formae, 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    VI.  129 

Irruat  et  friistra  lerro  diverberet  iimbras. 

Hinc  via,  Tartarei  quae  fert  Acherontis  ad  undas.  295 
Turbidus  hic  coeno  vastaque  voragine  gurges 
Aestuat  atque  omnem  Cocyto  eructat  arenam. 
Portitor  has  horrendus  aquas  et  flumina  servat 
Terribili  squalore  Charon,  cui  plurima  mento 
Canities  inculta  jacet,  stant  himina  flamma,  300 

Sordidus  ex  humeris  nodo  dependet  amictus  ; 
Ipse  ratem  conto  subigit  veHsque  ministrat, 
Et  ferruginea  subvectat  corpora  cymba, 
Jam  senior,  sed  cruda  deo  viridisque  senectus. 
Huc  omnis  turba  ad  ripas  effusa  ruebat,  305 

Matres  atque  viri,  defunctaque  corpora  vita 
T»Iagnanimum  heroum,  pueri  innuptaeque  puellae, 
Impositique  rogis  juvenes  ante  ora  parentum : 
Quam  multa  in  silvis  auctumni  frigore  primo 
Lapsa  cadunt  foha,  aut  ad  terram  gurgite  ab  alto         310 
Quam  multae  glomerantur  aves,  ubi  frigidus  annus 
Trans  pontum  fugat  et  terris  immittit  apricis. 
Stabant  orantes  primi  transmittere  cursum, 
Tendebantque  manus  ripae  ulterioris  amore  ; 
Navita  sed  tristis  nunc  hos,  nunc  accipit  illos,  315 

Ast  ahos  longe  submotos  arcet  arena. 
Aeneas-miratus  enim  motusque  tumultu- 
"  Dic  "  ait  "  0  virgo,  quid  vult  concursus  ad  amnem  ; 
"  Quidve  petuut  animae,  vel  quo  discrimine  ripas 
"  Hae  linquunt,  illae  remis  vada  hvida  verrunt  7  "        320 
Oni  sic  breviter  fata  est  longaeva  sacerdos : 
"  Anchisa  generate,  detim  certissima  proles, 
"  Cocyti  stagna  alta  vides  Stygiamque  paludem, 
'•'  Di  cujus  jurare  timent  et  fallere  numen.  324 

"  Haec  omnis,  quam  cernis.  inops  inhumataque  turba  est ; 
"  Portitor  ille  Charon  :  hi,  quos  vehit  unda,  sepulti ;  326 
"  Nec  ripas  datur  horrendas  et  rauca  fluenta 
6* 


130  AENEIDOS    LIB.    VI. 

"  Transportare  prius,  quam  sedibus  ossa  quierunt. 

"  Centum  errant  annos  volitantque  liaec  litora  circum  ; 

"  Tum  demum  admissi  stagna  exoptata  revisunt."        330 

Constitit  Ancliisa  satus  et  vestigia  pressit, 

Multa  putans,  sortemque  animo  miseratus  iniquam  : 

Cernit  ibi  maestos  et  mortis  honore  carentes 

Jjeucaspim  ct  Lyciae  ductorem  classis  Oronten, 

Quos,  simul  a  Troja  ventosa  per  aequora  vectos,  335 

Obruit  Auster,  aqua  involvens  navemque  virosque. 

Ecce  gubernator  sese  Palinurus  agebat, 
Qui  Libyco  nuper  cursu,  dum  sidera  servat, 
Exciderat  puppi  mediis  effusus  in  undis. 
Hunc  ubi  vix  multa  maestum  cognovit  in  umbra  ;        340 
Sic  prior  alloquitur :  "  Quis  te,  Palinure,  deorum 
"  Eripuit  nobis,  medioque  sub  aequore  mersit  ? 
"  Dic  age  :  namque  mihi,  fallax  haud  ante  repertus, 
"  Hoc  uno  responso  animum  delusit  ApoUo, 
"  Qui  fore  te  ponto  incolumem,  finesque  canebat  345 

"  Venturum  Ausonios.     En  haec  promissa  iides  est !  " 
Hle  autem  :  "  Neque  te  Phoebi  cortina  fefellit, 
"  Dux  Anchisiade,  nec  me  deus  aequore  mersit : 
"  Namque  gubernaclum  multa  vi  forte  revulsum, 
"  Cui  datus  haerebam  custos  cursusque  regebam,  350 

"  Praecipitans  traxi  mecum.     Maria  aspera  juro, 
"  Non  uUum  pro  me  tantum  cepisse  timorem, 
"  Quam  tua  ne  spoliata  armis,  excussa  magistro, 
"  Deficeret  tantis  navis  surgentibus  undis, 
"  Tres  Notus  hibernas  immensa  pcr  aequora  noctes      355 
"  Vexit  me  violentus  aqua ;  vix  lumine  quarto 
*'  Prospexi  Italiam  summa  sublimis  ab  unda. 
"  PauUatini  adnabam  terrae  ;  jam  tuta  tenebam, 
"  Ni  gens  crudelis  madida  cum  veste  gravatum, 
"  Prensantemque  uncis  manibus  capita  aspera  montis,  360 
"  Ferro  invasisset,  praedamque  ignara  putasset. 


(C 


(C 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    VI.  131 

"  Nunc  me  fluctus  habet,  versantque  in  litore  venti. 

"  Qiiod  te  per  coeli  jucundum  lumen  et  auras, 

"  Per  genitorem  oro,  per  spes  surgentis  luli ; 

"  Eripe  me  his,  invicte,  malis :  aut  tu  mihi  terram      365 

'  Injice-namque  potes-,  portusque  require  Velinos  ; 

Aut  tu,  si  qua  via  est,  si  quam  tibi  diva  creatrix 
"  Ostendit-neque  enim,  credo,  sine  numine  diviim 
"Flumina  tanta  paras  Stygiamque  innare  paludem-, 
"  Da  destram  misero,  et  tecum  me  toUe  per  undas,     370 
"  Sedibus  ut  saltem  placidis  in  morte  quiescam." 
Talia  fatus  erat,  coepit  quum  talia  vates : 
"  Unde  haec,  o  Palinure,  tibi  tam  dira  cupido  ? 
"  Tu  Stygias  inhumatus  aquas  amnemque  severum 
'•  Eumenidum  adspicies,  ripamve  injussus  adibis  ?        375 
"  Desine  fata  deum  flecti  sperare  precando ; 
"  Sed  cape  dicta  memor,  duri  solatia  casus. 
"  Nam  tua  finitimi  longe  lateque  per  urbes, 
"  Prodigiis  acti  coelestibus,  ossa  piabunt, 
"  Et  statuent  tumukim,  et  tumulo  solemnia  mittent,  380 
"  Aeternumque  locus  Palinuri  nomen  habebit." 

His  dictis  curae  emotae,  pulsusqiie  parumper 
Corde  dolor  tristi :  gaudet  cognomine  terra. 

Ergo  iter  inceptum  peragunt,  fluvioque  propinquant. 
Navita  qiios  jam  inde  ut  Stygia  prospexit  ab  unda       385 
Per  tacitum  nemus  ire  pedemque  advertere  ripae ; 
Sic  prior  aggreditur  dictis  atque  increpat  ultro  : 
"  Quisquis  es,  armatus  qui  nostra  ad  flumina  tendis, 
"  Fare  age,  quid  venias,  jam  istinc,  et  comprime  gressum. 
"  Umbrarum  hic  locus  est,  Somni  Noctisque  soporae :  390 
'•'  Corpora  viva  nefas  Stygia  vectare  carina. 
"  Nec  vero  Alciden  me  sum  laetatus  euntem 
"  Accepisse  lacu,  nec  Thesea  Pirithoumque, 
"  Dis  quamquam  geniti  atque  invicti  viribus  cssent. 
"  Tartan-ium  ille  manu  custodem  in  vincla  petivit        395 


132  AENEIDOS    LIB.    VI. 

"  Ipsius  a  solio  rcgis,  traxitqiie  trementem  ; 

"  Hi  dominam  Ditis  thalamo  deducere  adorti." 

Quae  contra  breviter  fata  est  Amphrysia  vates : 

"  Nullae  liic  insidiae  tales-absiste  moveri-, 

"  Nec  vim  tela  ferunt :  licet  ingens  janitor  antro  40C 

"  Aeternum  latrans  exsangues  terreat  umbras  ; 

"  Casta  licet  patrui  servet  Proserjnna  limen. 

"  Troius  Aeneas^  pietate  insignis  et  armis, 

"  Ad  genitorem  imas  Erebi  descendit  ad  umbras.' 

"  Si  te  nulla  movet  tantae  pietatis  imago  ;  405 

"  At  ramum  hunc  '"'-aperit  ramum,  qui  vcste  latebat- 

"  Agnoscas."     Tumida  ex  ira  tum  corda  residunt. 

Nec  j>lura  his.     Ille  admirans  venerabile  donum 

Fatalis  virgae,  longo  post  tempore  visum, 

Caeruleam  advertit  puppim  ripaeque  propinquat.  410 

Inde  alias  animas,  quae  per  juga  longa  sedebant, 

Deturbat,  laxatque  foros  ;  simul  accipit  alveo 

Ingentem  Aenean.     Gemuit  sub  pondere  cymba 

Sutilis,  et  multam  accepit  rimosa  paludem. 

Tandeni  trans  fluvium  incolumis  vatemque  virumque  415 

Informi  limo  glaucaque  exponit  in  ulva. 

Cerberus  haec  ingens  latratu  regna  trifauci 

Personat,  adverso  recubans  immanis  in  antro. 

Cui  vatcs,  horrere  videns  jam  coUa  colubris, 

Melle  soporatam  et  medicatis  frugibus  offam  420 

Objicit;  ille  fame  rabida  tria  guttura  pandens 

Corripit  objcctam,  atque  immania  terga  resolvit 

Fusus  humi,  totoque  ingens  extenditur  antro. 

Occupat  Aeneas  aditum  custode  sepulto, 

Evaditque  celer  ripam  irremeabihs  undae.  425 

Continuo  auditae  voces,  vagitus  et  ingens, 
Infautumque  animae  flcntes,  in  hmine  primo, 
Quos  dulcis  vitac  cxsortes  et  ab  ubere  raptos 
Abstulit  atra  dics  ct  funcre  mersit  acerbo. 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    VI.  133 

Hos  juxta  falso  damnati  crimine  mortis.  430 

Nec  vero  liae  sine  sorte  datae,  sine  judice,  sedes : 
Quaesitor  Minos  urnam  movet ;  ille  silentum 
Conciliumque  vocat,  vitasque  et  crimina  discit. 

Proxima  deinde  tenent  maesti  loca,  qui  sibi  letum 
Insontes  peperere  manu,  lucemque  j^erosi  435 

Projecere  animas.     Quam  vellent  aetliere  in  alto 
Nunc  et  pauperiem  et  duros  perferre  labores  I 
Fas  obstatj  tristique  palus  inamabilis  unda 
Alligat,  et  novies  Styx  interfusa  coercet. 

Nec  procul  binc  partcm  fusi  monstrantur  iu  omnem  440 
Lugentes  campi :  sic  illos  nomine  dicunt. 
Hic,  qiios  durus  amor  crudeli  tabe  peredit, 
Secreti  celant  calles,  et  myrtea  circum 
Silva  tegit :  curae  non  ipsa  in  morte  relinquunt.  444 

His  Phaedram  Procrimque  locis  maestamque  Eripbylen, 
Crudelis  nati  monstrantem  vulnera,  cernit,  446 

Evadnenque  et  Pasipbaen  ;  bis  Laodamia 
It  comes,  et  juvenis  quondam,  nunc  femina,  Caeneus, 
Rursus  et  in  veterem  fato  revoluta  fiiruram. 
Inter  quas  Pboenissa  receus  a  vulnere  Dido  450 

Errabat  silva  in  magna :  quam  Troius  beros 
Ut  primum  juxta  stetit  agnovitque  per  umbram 
Obscuram,  qualem  primo  qui  surgere  mense 
Aut  videt  aut  vidisse  putat  per  nubila  lunam  ; 
Demisit  lacrimas,  dulcique  affatus  amore  est :  455 

"  Infelix  Dido,  verus  mibi  nuntius  ergo 
"  Venerat  exstinctam  ferroque  extrema  secutam  ? 
'■  Funeris  heu  tibi  causa  fui?     Per  sidera  juro, 
"  Per  superos,  et  si  qua  fides  tellure  sub  ima  est, 
"  Invitus,  regina,  tuo  de  litore  cessi;  460 

"  Sed  me  jussa  deum,  quae  nunc  has  ire  per  umbras, 
•'  Per  loca  senta  situ  cogunt  noctemque  profundam, 
"  Imperiis  egere  suis,  nec  credere  quivi 


134  AENEIDOS    LIB.    VI. 

"  Hunc  tantum  tibi  me  discessu  ferre  dolorem. 

"  Siste  gradum,  teque  adspectu  ne  subtralie  nostro,     465 

''  Quem  fugis  ?  extrcmum,  fato  quod  te  alloquor,  lioc  est." 

Talibus  Aeneas  ardentem  et  torva  tuentem 

Lenibat  dictis  animum,  lacrimasque  ciebat ; 

lUa  solo  fixos  oculos  aversa  tenebat, 

Nec  magis  incepto  vultum  sermone  moveturj  470 

Quam  si  dura  silex  aut  stet  Marpesia  cautes. 

Taudem  corripuit  sese,  atque  inimica  refugit 

In  nemus  umbriferum,  conjux  ubi  pristinus  illi 

Eespondet  curis  aequatque  Sycbacus  amorem, 

Nec  minus  Aeneas,  casu  percussus  iniquo,  475 

Prosequitur  lacrimans  longe  et  miseratur  euntem. 

Inde  datum  molitur  iter.     Jamque  arva  tenebant 
Ultima,  quae  bello  clari  secreta  frequentant. 
Hic  illi  occurrit  Tydeus,  bic  inclytus  armis 
Partbenoj)aeus  et  Adrasti  pallentis  imago  ;  480 

Hic  multum  fleti  ad  superos  belloque  caduci 
Dardanidae,  quos  ille  omnes  longo  ordine  cernens 
Ingemuit,  Glaucumque  Medontaque  Thersilocbumque, 
Tres  Antenoridas,  Cererique  sacrum  Polypboeten, 
Idaeumque,  etiam  currus,  etiam  arma  tenentem.  485 

Circumstaut  animae  dextra  laevaque  frequentes. 
Nec  vidisse  semel  satis  est :  juvat  usque  morari, 
Et  conferre  gradum,  et  veniendi  discere  causas. 
At  Danaum  jDroceres  Agamemnoniaeque  pbalangcb 
Ut  videre  virum  fulgentiaque  arma  pcr  umbras,  490 

Ingenti  trepidare  metu  :  pars  vertcre  terga, 
Ceu  quondam  petiere  rates ;  pars  tollcre  vocem 
Exiguam  :  inceptus  clamor  frustratur  biantes. 
Atque  bic  Priamiden  laniatum  corporc  toto 
Deipbobum  vidit,  lacerum  crudeliter  ora,  495 

Ora  manusque  ambas,  populataque  tempora  raptis 
Auribus,  et  truncas  inbnnesto  viibiore  nares. 


AENEIDOS    LIB,    VI.  135 

Yix  adeo  agnovit  pavitantem  et  dira  tegentem 

Supplicia,  et  notis  compellat  vocibus  ultro : 

•'  Deipliobe  armipotens,  genus  alto  a  sanguine  Teucri,  500 

"  Quis  tam  crudelcs  optavit  sumere  poenas  ? 

"  Cui  tantum  de  te  licuit  ?     Mihi  fama  suprema 

"  Nocte  tulit  fessum  vasta  te  caede  Pelasgura 

"  Procubuisse  super  confusae  stragis  acervum. 

*'  Tunc  egomet  tumulum  Ehoeteo  in  litore  inanem       505 

"  Constitui,  et  magna  Manes  ter  voce  vocavi. 

"  Nomen  et  arma  locum  servant ;  te,  amice,  ncquivi 

"  Conspicere  et  patria  decedens  ponere  terra." 

Ad  quae  Priamides  :  "  Nihil  o  tibi  amice  relictum  : 

"  Omnia  Denphobo  solvisti  et  funeris  umbris,  510 

"  Sed  me  fata  mea  ct  scelus  exitiale  Lacaenae 

*'  His  mersere  malis ;  illa  haec  monumenta  reliquit. 

"  Naraque  ut  supremam  falsa  inter  gaudia  noctem 

"  Egerimus,  nosti ;  et  niraiura  meminisse  necesse  est. 

*'  Quum  fatalis  equus  saltu  super  ardua  venit  515 

"  Pergama,  et  armatura  peditem  gravis  attulit  alvo  ; 

"  Illa,  chorum  simulans,  evantes  ore-ia  circum 

"  Ducebat  Phrygias,  flammara  media  ipsa  tenebat 

"  Ingentem,  et  summa  Danaos  ex  arce  vocabat. 

"  Tum  me  confectum  curis  somnoque  gravatum  520 

"  Infelix  habuit  thalamus,  pressitque  jacentem 

"  Dulcis  et  alta  quies,  placidaeque  similliraa  morti. 

"  Egregia  interea  conjux  arraa  orania  tectis 

"  Araovet,  et  fidura  capiti  subduxerat  ensem  ; 

"  Intra  tecta  vocat  Menelaum  et  limina  pandit,  525 

"  Scilicet  id  magnum  sperans  fore  munus  amanti, 

"  Et  famara  exstingui  veterura  sic  posse  malorum. 

"  Quid  moror  ?     Irrumpunt  thalamo  ;  coraes  additur  una 

"  Hortator  scelerum  Aeolides.     Di,  ta^ia  Graiis 

"  Instaurate,  pio  si  poenas  ore  reposco  !  530 

"  Sed  te  qui  vivura  casus,  age  fare  \dci3sim, 


136  ABNEIDOS    LIB.    VI. 

"  Attulcriiit      Pclagme  venis  crroribiis  actus, 

"  An  monitu  divum  ?  an — quae  te  Fortuna  fatigat, 

"  Ut  tristcs  sine  sole  domos,  loca  turbida,  adircs  ?  " 

Hac  vicc  sermonum  roseis  Aurora  quadrigis  535 

Jam  medium  aetherio  cursu  trajecerat  axem, 

Et  fors  omne  datum  tralierent  per  talia  tempus ; 

Sod  comes  admonuit,  breviterque  afFata  Sibylla  est : 

''  Nox  ruit,  Aenea ;  nos  flendo  ducimus  horas  ! 

"  Hic  locus  est,  partes  ubi  se  via  findit  in  ambas :        540 

"  Dextera  quae  Ditis  magni  su.b  moenia  tendit, 

"  Hac  iter  Elvsium  nobis ;  at  laeva  malorum 

"  Exercet  poenas  et  ad  impia  Tartara  mittit." 

Deipbobus  contra :  "  Ne  saevi,  magna  sacerdos  : 

"  Discedam,  explebo  numerum,  reddarque  tenebris.      545 

"  I  decus,  i,  nostrum !  melioribus  utere  fatis  !  " 

Tantum  eifatus,  et  in  verbo  vestigia  torsit. 

Kespicit  Aencas  subito  et  sub  rupe  sinistra 
Moenia  lata  videt,  triplici  circumdata  muro, 
Quae  rapidus  flammis  ambit  torrentibus  amnis,  550 

Tartareus  Pblegethon,  torquetque  sonantia  saxa. 
Porta  adversa,  ingens,  solidoque  adamante  columnae, 
Vis  ut  nulla  virum,  non  ipsi  exscindere  ferro 
Coelicolae-  valeant.     Stat  ferrea  turris  ad  auras, 
Tisiplioneque  sedens,  palla  succincta  cruenta,  555 

Vestibulum  exsomnis  servat  noctesque  diesque. 
Hiiic  exaudiri  gemitus  et  saeva  sonare 
Verbcra,  tum  stridor  ferri  tractaeque  catenae. 
Constitit  Aeneas,  strepituque  exterritus  haesit. 
"  Quac  scelerum  facies  ?  o  virgo,  eftare  ;  quibusve        560 
"  Urguentur  pocnis  ?  qui  tantus  plangor  ad  auras  ?" 
Tum  vatcs  sic  orsa  loqui :  "  Dux  inclytc  Tcucrum, 
"  Nulli  fas  casto  scoleratum  insistere  limen ; 
"  Sed  me  quum  lucis  Hecate  praefecit  Avernis, 
"  Ipsa  deum  poenas  docuit  perque  omnia  duxit.  5^5 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    VI.  137 

•'  Gnosius  haec  Rhadamantlms  habet,  durissima  resfna, 

"  Castigatque  auditque  dolos,  subigitqne  fateri, 

"  Quae  quis  apud  superos,  furfco  lactatus  inani, 

"  Distulit  in  seram  commissa  piacula  mortem. 

"  Continuo  sontes  ultrix  accincta  flagello  570 

"  Tisiphone  quatit  insultans,  torvosque  sinistra 

"  Intentans  angues,  vocat  agmina  sacva  sororum. 

''  Tum  demum  horrisono  stridentes  cardine  sacrae 

''  Panduntur  portae,     Cernis,  custodia  qualis 

"  Vestibulo  sedeat,  facies  quae  limina  servet  ?  575 

"  Quinquaginta  atris  immanis  hiatibus  Hydra 

"  Saevior  intus  habet  sedem;  tum  Tartarus  ipse 

"  Bis  patet  in  praeceps  tantum  tenditque  sub  umbras, 

"  Quantus  ad  aetherium  coeli  susjjectus  Olympum. 

"  Hic  genus  antiquum  Terrae,  Titania  pubes,  580 

"  Fulmine  dejecti  fundo  volvuntur  in  imo. 

"  Hic  et  Aloidas  geminos,  immania  vidi 

"  Corpora,  qui  manibus  magnum  rescindere  coelum 

"  Aggressi,  superisque  Jovem  detrudere  regnis. 

"  Vidi  et  crudeles  dantem  Salmonea  poenas,  585 

"  Dum  flammas  Jovis  et  sonitus  imitatur  Olympi-  : 

'■  Quatuor  hic  invectus  equis  et  lam^Dada  quassans 

"  Per  Graium  populos  mediaeque  per  EKdis  urbem 

"  Ibat  ovans,  divumque  sibi  poscebat  honorem, 

"  Demens,  qui  nimbos  et  non  imitabile  fiilmen  590 

"  Aere  et  cornipedum  pulsu  simularet  equorum. 

"  At  pater  omnipotens  densa  inter  nubila  telum 

"  Contorsit,  non  ille  faces  nec  fumea  taedis 

"  Lumina,  praecipitemque  immani  turbine  adegit.- 

"  Nec  non  et  Tityon,  Terrae  omniparentis  alumnum,  595 

"  Cernere  erat,  per  tota  novem  cui  jugera  corpus 

"  Porrigitur,  rostroque'immanis  vultur  obunco 

"  Immortale  jecur  tondens  fecundaque  poenis 

"  VisQcra  rimaturque  epulis,  habitatque  sub  alto 


138  AENEIDOS    LIB.    VI. 

"  Peciore,  nec  fibris  requies  datur  ulla  renatis.  600 

"  Quid  memorem  Lapitlias,  Ixiona  Pirithoumque-, 
"  Quos  super  atra  silex  jam  jam  lapsura  cadentique 
"  Immiuet  assimilis,  lucent  genialibus  altis 
"  Aurca  fulcra  toris,  epulaeque  ante  ora  paratae 
"  Eegifico  luxu  ;  Furiarum  maxima  juxta  605 

"  Accubat,  et  manibus  probibet  contingere  mensas, 
^"  Exsurgitque  facem  attollens,  atque  intonat  ore-? 
"  Hic,  quibus  invisi  fratres,  dum  vita  manebat, 
"  Pulsatusve  parcns,  et  fraus  innexa  clienti ; 
"  Aut  qui  divitiis  soli  incubuere  repertis,  .  610 

"  Nec  partem  posuere  suis :  qiiae  maxima  turba  est ; 
"  Quique  ob  adulterium  caesi ;  quique  arma  secuti 
"  Impia,  ne^  veriti  dominorum  fallere  dextras, 
"  Inclusi  poenam  exspectant.     Ne  quaere  doceri,  614 

"  Quam  poenam,  aut  quae  forma  viros  fortunave  mersit. 
"  Saxum  ingens  volvunt  alii,  radiisque  rotarum  616 

"  Districti  pendent  :  sedet  aeternumque  sedebit 
"  Infelix  Tbeseus  ;  Pblegyasque  miserrimus  omnes 
"  Admonet  et  magna  testatur  voce  per  umbras  : 
"  '  Discite  justitiam  moniti,  et  non  temnere  divos.'  "    620 
"  Vendidit  bic  auro  patriam  dominumque  potentem 
"  Imposuit,  fixit  leges  pretio  atque  refixit ; 
"  Hic  tbalamum  invasit  natae  vetitosque  bymenaeos  : 
"  Ausi  omncs  immane  nefas  ausoque  potiti. 
"  Non,  mibi  si  linguae  centum  sint  oraque  centum,      625 
"  Ferrea  vox,  omncs  scclerum  comprendere  formas, 
"  Omnia  poenarum  percurrere  nomina  possim." 
Haec  ubi  dicta  dedit  Pboebi  longaeva  saccrdos  ; 
"  Sed  jam  age,  carpe  viam  et  susceptum  perfice  munus  ! 
"  Accelercmus  !  "  ait.     "  Cyclopum  cducta  caminis      630 
"  Moenia  conspicio  atque  adverso  foraice  portas, 
"  Haec  ubi  nos  pracepta  jubcnt  dcponere  dona." 
Dixcrat,  et  pariter  gressi  per  opaca  viarum 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    VI.  139 

Corripiunt  spatium  medium,  foribusque  propinquant. 
Occupat  Aeneas  aditum,  corpusque  recenti  635 

Spargit  aqua,  ramumque  adverso  in  limine  figit/ 

His  demum  exactis,  perfecto  munere  divae, 
Devenere  locos  laetos  et  amoena  vireta 
Fortunatorum  nemorum  sedesque  beatas. 
Largior  liic  campos  aether  et  lumine  vestit  640 

Purpureo,  solemque  suum,  sua  sidera  norunt. 
Pars  in  gramineis  exercent  membra  palaestris, 
Contendunt  ludo  et  fulva  luctantur  arena ; 
Pars  pedibus  plaudunt  clioreas  et  carmina  dicunt. 
Nec  non  Tlireicius  longa  cum  veste  sacerdos  645 

Obloquitur  numeris  septem  discrimina  vocum, 
Jamque  eadem  digitis,  jam  pectine  pulsat  eburno. 
Hic  genus  antiquum  Teucri,  pulclierrima  proles, 
Magnanimi  heroes,  nati  melioribus  annis, 
Ilusque  Assaracusque  et  Trojae  Dardanus  auctor,         650 
Arma  procul  currusque  virum  miratur  inanes  ; 
Stant  terra  defixae  hastae,  passimque  soluti 
Per  campum  pascuntur  equi :  quae  gratia  curruum 
Armorumque  fuit  vivis,  quae  cura  nitentes 
Pascere  equos,  eadem  sequitur  tellure  repostos.  655 

Conspicit,  ecce,  alios  dextra  laevaque  per  herbam 
Vescentes  laetumque  choro  Paeana  canentes 
Inter  odoratum  laari  nemus,  unde  superne 
Plurimus  Eridani  per  silvam  volvitur  amnis. 
Hic  manus,  ob  patriam  pugnando  vulnera  passi,  660 

Quique  sacerdotes  casti,  dum  vita  manebat, 
Quique  pii  vates  et  Phoebo  digna  locuti, 
Inventas  aut  qui  vitam  excoluere  per  artes, 
Quique  sui  memores  alios  fecere  merendo : 
Omnibus  his  nivea  cinguntur  tempora  vitta.  665 

Quos  circumfusos  sic  est  afiata  Sibylla, 
Musaeum  ante  omnes-medium  nam  plurima  turba 


140  AENEIDOS    LIB.    VI. 

Himc  habet,  atque  humeris  exstantem  suspicit  altis-: 

"  Dicite,  felices  aniraae,  tuque,  optime  vates, 

"  Quae  rcgio  Anchisen,  quis  habet  locus  ?  illius  ergo    670 

"  Veniinus  et  magnos  Erebi  tranavimus  amnes." 

Atque  huic  responsum  paucis  ita  reddidit  heros  : 

"  Nulli  certa  domus  ;  lucis  habitamus  opacis, 

'''  Eiparumque  toros  et  prata  recentia  rivis 

"  Incolimus.     Scd  vos,  si  fert  ita  corde  voluntas,  675 

"  Hoc  superate  jugum  ;  et  facili  jam  tramite  sistam." 

Dixit,  et  ante  tuht  gressum,  camposque  nitentes 

Desuper  ostcntat ;  dehinc  summa  cacumina  linquunt. 

At  pater  Anchises  penitus  convalle  virenti 

Inclusas  animas  superumque  ad  lumen  ituras  680 

Lustrabat  studio  recolens,  omnemque  suorum 

Forte  recensebat  numerum  carosque  nepotes, 

Fataque  fortunasque  virum  moresque  manusque. 

Isque  ubi  tendentem  adversum  per  gramina  vidit 

Aenean,  alacris  palmas  utrasque  tetendit,  685 

EfFusaeque  genis  lacrimae,  et  vox  excidit  ore  : 

"  Venisti  tandem,  tuaque  exspectata  parenti 

^^  Vicit  iter  durum  pietas  7  datur  ora  tueri, 

"  Nate,  tua,  et  notas  audire  et  reddere  voces  ? 

"  Sic  equidem  ducebam  animo  rebarque  futurum,         690 

"  Tempora  dinumerans,  nec  me  mea  cura  fefellit. 

"  Quas  ego  te  terras  et  quanta  per  acquora  vectum 

"  Accipio  !  quantis  jactatum,  nate,  pericUs  ! 

"  Quam  mctui,  ne  quid  Libyae  tibi  regna  nocerent !  '* 

Ille  autem :  "  Tua  me,  genitor,  tua  tristis  imago,         695 

"  Saepius  occurrcns,  haec  limina  tendere  adegit. 

"  Stant  sale   Tyrrheno  closses.     Da  jungere  dextram, 

"  Da,  genitor,  teque  amplexu  ne  subtrahe  nostro." 

Sic  memorans  hxrgo  fletu  simul  ora  rigabat. 

Ter  conatus  ibi  coUo  dare  brachia  circum ;  700 

Ter  frustra  comprensa  manus  effugit  imago, 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    VI.  141 

Par  levibus  ventis  volucrique  simillima  somno. 

Interea  videt  Aeneas  in  valle  reducta 
Seclusum  nemus  et  virgulta  sonantia  silvae, 
Letbaeumque,  domos  placidas  qui  praenatat,  amnem.  705 
Hunc  circum  innumerae  gentes  populique  volabant ; 
Ac  velut  in  pratis  ubi  apes  aestate  serena 
Floribus  insidunt  variis  et  candida  circum 
Lilia  funduntur,  strepit  omnis  murmure  campus. 
Horrescit  visu  subito  causasque  requirit  710 

Tnscius  Aeneas,  quae  sint  ea  ilumina  porro, 
Quive  viri  tanto  complerint  agmine  ripas. 
Tum  pater  Ancbises  :  "  Animae,  quibus  altera  fato 
"  Corpora  debentur,  Letbaei  ad  fluminis  undam 
"  Securos  latices  et  longa  oblivia  potant.  715 

"  Has  equidem  memorare  tibi  atque  ostendere  coram, 
"  Jampridem  hanc  prolem  cupio  enumerare  meorum, 
"  Quo  magis  Italia  mecum  laetere  reperta." — 
"  0  pater,  anne  aliquas  ad  coelum  binc  ire  putandum  est 
"  Sublimes  animas,  iterumque  ad  tarda  reverti  720 

"  Corpora .?     Quae  lucis  miseris  tam  dira  cupido  ?  " — 
"  Dicam  equidem,  nec  te  suspensum,  nate,  tenebo," 
Suscipit  Ancbises,  atque  ordine  singula  pandit. 
"  Principio  coebim  ac  terras  camposque  liquentes, 
'*  Lucentemque  globum  Lunae  Titaniaque  astra,  725 

"  Spiritus  intu3  alit,  totamque  infusa  per  artus 
*■'  Mens  agitat  molem  et  magno  se  corpore  miscet. 
"  Inde  hominum  pecudumque  genus  vitaeque  volantum, 
"  Et  quae  marmoreo  fert  monstra  sub  aequore  pontus. 
"  Igneus  est  oUis  vigor  et  coelestis  origo  730 

'*  Seminibus,  quantum  non  noxia  corpora  tardant, 
'*  Terrenique  hebetant  artus  moribundaque  membra, 
"  Hinc  metuunt  cupiuntque,  dolenfc   gaudentque,  neque 
"  Dispiciunt  clausae  tenebris  et  carcere  caeco.  [auras 

"  Quin  et  supremo  quum  lumine  vita  reliquit,  735 


142  AENEIDOS    LIB.    VI. 

"  Non  taraen  omne  malum  miseris  nec  funditus  omnes 

"  CorjDoreae  excedunt  pestes,  penitusque  necesse  est 

"  Multa  diu  concreta  modis  inolescere  miris. 

"  Ergo  cxercentur  i^oeniSj  veterumque  malorum 

"  Supplicia  expendunt :  aliae  panduntur  inanes  740 

•'  Suspensae  ad  ventos,  aliis  sub  gurgite  vasto 

"  Infectum  eluitur  scelus,  aut  exuritur  igni. 

"  Quisque  suos  patimur  Manes  :  exinde  per  amplum 

"  Mittimur  Elysium,  et  pauci  laeta  arva.tenemus  ; 

"  Donec  longa  dies,  perfecto  temporis  orbe,  745 

"  Concretam  exemit  labem,  purumque  relinquit 

"  Aetherium  sensum  atque  aurai  simj^licis  ignem. 

"  Has  omnes,  ubi  mille  rotam  volvere  per  annos, 

"  Letbaeum  ad  fluvium  deus  evocat  aG:mine  mairno, 

'*  Scilicet  immemores  supera  ut  convexa  revisant,         750 

"  Rursus  et  incipiant  in  corpora  velle  reverti." 

Dixerat  Anchises,  natumque  unaque  Sibyllam 

Conventus  trahit  in  medios  turbamque  sonantem, 

Et  tumulum  capit,  unde  omnes  longo  ordine  posset 

Adversos  legere  et  venientum  discere  "vultus.  755 

"  Nunc  age,  Dardaniam  prolem  quae  deinde  sequatur 

"  Gloria,  qui  maneant  Itala  de  gente  nepotes, 

"  Illustres  animas  nostrumque  in  nomen  ituras, 

"  Expediam  dictis,  et  te  tua  fata  docebo. 

"  IUe,  vides,  pura  juvenis  qui  nititur  hasta,  760 

"  Proxima  sorte  tenet  lucis  loca,  primus  ad  auras 

"  Aetherias  Italo  commixtus  sanguine  surget, 

"  Silvius,  Albanum  nomen,  tua  postuma  proles  : 

"  Quem  tibi  longaevo  scrum  Lavinia  conjux 

"  Educet  silvis  regem  regumque  parentem  :  765 

"  Unde  genus  Longa  nostrum  dominabitur  Alba. 

''  Proximus  ille  Procas,  Trqjanae  gloria  gcntis, 

"  Et  Capys  et  Numitor,  et  qui  te  nomine  reddet 

"  Silvius  Aeneas,  pariter  pietate  vel  armis 


AENEIDOS   LIB,    VI.  143 

"  Egregius,  si  iimquam  regnandam  acceperit  Albam.    770 

"  Qui  juvenes  !     Quantas  ostentant,  adspice,  vires  ! 

•'  Atque  umbrata  gerunt  civili  tempora  quercu. 

"  Hi  tibi  Nomentum  et  Gabios  urbemque  Fidenamj 

"  Hi  Collatinas  imponent  montibus  arces 

"  Pometios  Castrumque  Inui  Bolamque  Coramque  :     775 

"  Haec  tum  nomina  erunt,  nunc  suut  sine  nomine  terrae. 

"  Quin  et  avo  comitem  sese  Mavortius  addet 

"  Romulus,  Assaraci  quem  sanguinis  Hia  mater 

"  Educet.     Viden',  ut  geminae  stant  vertice  cristae, 

"  Et  pater  ipse  suo  superiim  jam  signat  bonore  ?  780 

"  En,  hujus,  nate,  auspiciis  illa  inclyta  Roma 

"  Imperium  terris,  animos  aequabit  Olympo, 

"  Septemque  una  sibi  muro  circumdabit  arces, 

''Felix  prole  vinim:  qualis  Berecyntia  mater 

"  Invehitur  curru  Phrygias  turrita  per  urbes,  785 

"  Laeta  deum  partu,  centum  complexa  nepotes, 

"  Omnes  coelicolas,  omnes  supera  alta  tenentes. 

"  Huc  geminas  nunc  flecte  acies,  hanc  adspice  gentem 

"  Eomanosque  tuos.     Hic  Caesar  et  omnis  luli 

"  Progenies,  magnum  coeli  ventura  sub  axem.  790 

"  Hic  vir,  hic  est,  tibi  quem  promitti  saepius  audis, 

''  Augustus  Caesar,  Divi  genus  :  aurea  condet 

"  Saecula  qui  rursus  Latio,  regnata  per  arva 

"  Saturno  quondam,  super  et  Garamantas  et  Indos 

"  Proferet  imperium  ;  jacet  extra  sidera  tellus,  795 

"  Extra  anni  Solisque  vias,  ubi  coelifer  Atlas 

['  Axem  humero  torquet  stellis  ardentibus  aptum. 

"  Hujus  in  adventum  jam  nunc  et  Caspia  regna 

"  Responsis  horrent  divum  et  Maeotia  tellus, 

"  Et  septemgemini  turbant  trepida  ostia  Nili.  800 

"  Nec  vero  Alcides  tantum  telluris  obivit, 

"  Fixerit  aeripedem  cervam  licet,  aut  Erymanthi 

'  Pacarit  nemora  et  Lernam  tremefecerit  arcu ; 


144  AENEIDOS    LIB.    VI. 

"  Nec,  qui  pampincis  victor  juga  flectit  habenis, 

"  Liber,  agens  celso  Nysae  de  vertice  tigres.  805 

"  Et  dubitamus  adhuc  virtutem  extendere  factis, 

"  Aut  metus  Ausonia  probibet  consistere  terra  ? 

"  Quis  procul  ille  autem  ramis  insignis  olivae, 

"  Sacra  ferens  ?     Nosco  crines  incanaque  menta 

"  Regis  Romani,  primus  qui  legibus  urbem  810 

"  Fundabit,  Curibus  parvis  et  paupere  terra 

"  Missus  in  imperium  magnum.     Cui  deinde  subibit, 

"  Otia  qui  rumpet  patriae,  rcsidesque  movebit 

"  Tullus  in  arma  viros  et  jam  desueta  triumpbis 

"  Agmina.     Quem  juxta  sequitur  jactantior  Ancus,     815 

"  Nunc  quoque  jam  nimium  gaudens  popularibus  auris. 

''  Vis  et  Tarquinios  reges  animamque  superbam 

"  Ultoris  Bruti  fascesque  videre  receptos  ? 

"  Consulis  imperium  bic  primus  saevasquc  secures 

"  Accipiet,  natosque  pater  nova  bella  moveutes  820 

"  Ad  poenam  pulcbra  pro  libertate  vocabit, 

"  Infelix  !     Utcumque  ferent  ea  facta  minores, 

"  Vincet  amor  patriae  laudumque  immensa  cupido. 

"  Quin  Dccios  Drusosque  procul  saevumque  securi 

"  Adspice  Torquatum  et  referentem  signa  Camillum.  825 

"  Ulae  autem,  paribus  quas  fulgere  cernis  in  armis, 

"  Concordes  animae  nunc  et  dum  nocte  premuntur 

"  Heu  quantum  inter  se  bellum,  si  lumina  vitae 

"  Attigerint,  quantas  acies  stragemque  ciebunt, 

"  Aggeribus  socer  Alpinis  atquc  arce  Monoeci  830 

"  Descendens,  gener  advcrsis  instructus  Eois  ! 

"  Ne,  pueri,  ne  tanta  animis  adsuescite  bella, 

"  Neu  patriae  validas  in  viscera  vertite  vires  ; 

"  Tuque  prior,  tu  parcc,  genus  qui  ducis  Olympo, 

"  Projice  tela  manu,  sanguis  mcus  !  835 

"  Ille  triumpbata  Capitolia  ad  alta  Corintbo 

"  Victor  aget  currum,  caesis  insignis  Acbivis. 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    VI.  145 

"  Eruet  ille  Argos  Agamemnoniasquo  Mycenas^ 
"  Ipsumque  Aeaciden,  genus  armipotentis  Achilli, 
"  Ultus  avos  Trojae,  templa  et  temerata  Minervae.      840 
"  Qnis  te,  magne  Cato,  tacitum,  aut  te,  Cosse,  relinquat  ? 
"  Quis  Gracchi  genus,  aut  geminos,  duo  fuhnina  belli, 
"  Scipiadas,  cladem  Libyae,  parvoque  potentem 
iLB\abricium,  vel  te  sulco,  Serrane,  serentem  ? 
"  Quo  fessum  rapitis,  Fabii  ?     Tu  Maximus  ille  es,     845 
"  Unus  qui  nobis  cunctando  restituis  rem. 
"  Excudent  ahi  spirantia  molhus  aera, 
"  Credo  equidem,  vivos  ducent  de  marmore  vultus 
"  Orabunt  causas  mehus,  coehque  meatus 
"  Describent  racho  et  surgentia  sidera  dicent ;  850 

"  Tu  regere  imperio  populos,  Eomane,  memento  : 
"  Hae  tibi  erunt  artes,  pacisque  imponere  morem, 
"  Parcere  subjectis,  et  debehare  superbos." 
Sic  pater  Anchises,  atque  haec  mirantibus  addit : 
"  Adspice,  ut  insignis  spohis  Marcehus  opimis  85.5 

"  Ingreditur,  victorque  viros  supereminet  omnes  ! 
"  Hic  rem  Eomanam,  magno  turbante  tumultu, 
"  Sistet,  eques  sternet  Poenos  Ganumriue  rebeHem, 
"  Tertiaque  arma  patri  suspendet  capta  Quirino." 
Atque  hic  Aeneas-una  namque  ire  videbat  8G0 

Egregium  forma  juvenem  et  fulgentibus  armis^ 
Sed  frons  laeta  parum,  et  dejecto  himina  vultu-: 
"  Quis,  pater,  ihe,  \drum  qui  sic  comitatur  euntem  ? 
"  Fihus,  anne  ahquis  magna  de  stirpe  nepotum  ? 
"  Qui  strepitus  circa  comitum  !  quantum  instar  in  ipso  !  SG5 
"  Sed  nox  atra  caput  tristi  circumvolat  umbra." 
Tum  pater  Anchises,  lacrimis  ingressus  obortis  : 
"  0  gnate,  ingentem  luctum  ne  quaere  tuorum. 

Ostendent  terris  hunc  tantum  fata,  neque  ultra 
"  Esse  sinent.     Nimium  vobis  Eomana  propago  870 

"  Visa  potens,  superi,  propria  haec  si  dona  fuissent. 


(C 


(C 


146  AENEIDO.S    LIB.    VI. 

"  Quantos  illc  viruin  magnam  Mavortis  acl  urbem 

"  Campus  aget  gemitus  ;  vcl  quae,  Tibcrine,  videbis 

"  Funcra,  quum  tumulum  jn-acterlaberc  recentcm  ! 

"  Nec  puer  Iliaca  quisquam  de  gente  Latinos  875 

"  In  tantum  spe  tollct  avos,  nec  Komula  quondam 

"  Ullo  se  tantum  tcllus  jactabit  alumno. 

"  Hcu  pictas,  hcu  prisca  fides,  invictaque  bello 

"  Dextera  !  non  illi  se  quisquam  impune  tulisset 

''  Obvius  armato,  seu  quum  pedes  iret  in  hostcm,         880 

"  Seu  spumantis  equi  foderet  calcaribus  armos, 

"  Heu,  miserande  puer,  si  qua  fata  aspera  rumpas, 

"  Tu  Marcellus  cris.     Manibus  date  lilia  plenis  ; 

"  Purpureos  spargam  flores,  animamque  nepotis 

•'  His  saltem  accumulem  donis,  et  fungar  inani  885 

"  Munere."     Sic  tota  passim  regione  vagantur 

Aeris  in  campis  Latis,  atque  omnia  lustrant. 

Quae  postquam  Anchises  natum  per  singula  duxit, 

Incenditque  animum  famae  venientis  amore ; 

Exin  bella  viro  mcmorat,  quao  deinde  gerenda,  890 

Laurentesque  docet  populos  urbemque  Latini, 

Et  quo  qucmquc  modo  fugiatque  feratquc  laborcm. 

Sunt  geminae  Somni  portae,  quarum  altera  fertur 
Cornea,  qua  vcris  facilis  datur  exitus  Umbris  ; 
Altcra  cancj^nti  perfecta  nitens  elephanto,  895 

Sed  falsa  ad  coelum  mittunt  insomnia  Manes. 
His  ubi  tum  natum  Anchises  unaque  SibyUam 
Prosequitur  dictis,  portaque  emittit  eburna  ; 
Ille  viam  secat  ad  navcs  sociosquc  revisit, 
Tum  se  ad  Caietae  rccto  fcrt  limite  portum.  900 

Ancora  de  prora  jacitur  ;  stant  litore  puppes. 


P.  VIRGILII  MAROXIS 

AENEIDOS 

LIBEE  SEPTIMUS. 


Tu  quoque  litoribus  nostris,  Aeneia  nutrix, 

Aeternam  moriens  famam,  Caieta,  dedisti ; 

Et  nunc  servat  honos  sedem  tuus,  ossaque  nomen 

Hesperia  in  magna,  si  qua  est  ea  gloria,  signat. 

At  pius  exsequiis  Aeneas  rite  solutis,  5 

Aggere  composito  tumuli,  postquam  alta  quierunt 

Acquora,  tendit  iter  velis  portumque  relinquit. 

Adspirant  aurae  in  noctem,  nec  candida  cursus 

Luna  negat,  splendet  tremulo  sub  lumine  pontus. 

Proxifiia  Circaeae  raduntur  litora  terrae,  10 

Dives  inaccessos  ubi  Solis  filia  lucos 

Assiduo  resonat  cantu,  tectisque  superbis 

Urit  odoratam  nocturna  in  lumina  cedrum, 

Arguto  tenues  percurrens  pectine  telas. 

Hinc  exaudiri  gemitus  iraeque  leonum,  15 

Vincla  recusantum  et  sera  sub  nocte  rudentum, 

Setigerique  sues  atque  in  praesepibus  ursi 

Saevire,  ac  formae  magnorum  ululare  luporum : 

Quos  liominum  ex  facie  dea  saeva  potentibus  herbis 

IndueratCirce  in  vultus  ac  terga  ferarum.  20 

Quae  ne  monstra  pii  paterentur  talia  Troes, 


148  AENEIDOS    LIB.    VII 

Delati  in  portus,  neu  litora  dira  subirent, 

Neptunus  ventis  implevit  vela  secundis, 

Atque  fugam  dedit  et  praeter  vada  fer\dda  vexit. 

Jamque  rubescebat  radiis  mare,  et  aetlierc  ab  alto  25 

Aurora  in  roseis  fulgebat  lutea  bigis ; 

Quum  venti  posuere,  omnisque  repente  resedit 

Flatus,  et  in  lento  luctantur  marmore  tonsae. 

Atque  hic  Aeneas  ingentem  ex  aequore  lucum 

Prospicit :  bunc  inter  fluvio  Tiberinus  amoeno,  30 

Verticibus  rapidis  et  multa  flavus  arena, 

In  mare  prorumpit ;  variae  circumque  supraque 

Assuetae  ripis  volucres  et  fluminis  alveo 

Aethera  mulcebant  cantu,  lucoque  volabant. 

Flectere  iter  sociis  terraeque  advertere  proras  35 

Imperat,  et  laetus  fluvio  succedit  opaco. 

Nunc  age,  qui  regeS;  Erato,  quae  tempora  rerum, 
Quis  Latio  antiquo  fuerit  status,  adveua  classem 
Quum  primum  Ausoniis  exercitus  appulit  oris, 
Expediam,  et  primae  revocabo  exordia  pugnae  :  40 

Tu  vatem,  tu,  diva,  mone  !     Dicam  liorrida  bella, 
Dicam  acies  actosque  animis  in  funera  reges, 
Tyrrhenamque  manum  totamque  sub  arma  coactam 
Hesperiam.     Major  rerum  milii  nascitur  ordo ; 
Majus  opus  moveo.     Kex  arva  Latinus  et  urbes  45 

Jam  senior  longa  placidas  in  pace  regebat. 
Hunc  Fauno  et  nympha  genitum  Laurente  Marica 
Accipimus  ;  Fauno  Picus  pater ;  isque  parentem 
Te,  Saturne,  refert ;  tu  sanguinis  ultimus  auctor. 
Filius  huic,  fato  diviim,  prolesque  virilis  50 

Nulla  fuit,  primaque  oriens  erepta  juventa  est. 
Sola  domum  et  tantas  scrvabat  filia  scdes, 
Jam  matura  viro,  jam  plenis  nubilis  annis. 
Multi  illam  magno  e  Latio  totaque  petebant 
Ausonia ;  petit  ante  alios  pulcherrimus  omnes  55 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    VII.  149 

Tiirnus,  avis  atavisque  potens  :  quem  regia  conjux 

Adjungi  generum  miro  properahat  amore  ; 

Sed  variis  portenta  detim  terroribus  obstant. 

Lauras  erat  tecti  medio,  in  penetralibus  altis, 

Sacra  comam,  multosq[ue  metu  servata  per  annos,  60 

Quam  pater  inventam,  primas  quum  conderet  arces, 

Ipse  ferebatur  Pboebo  sacrasse  Latinus, 

Laurentesque  ab  ea  nomen  posuisse  colonis. 

Hujus  apes  summum  densae-mirabile  dictu  !- 

Stridorc  ingenti  liquidum  trans  aethera  vectae,  65 

Obsedere  apicem,  et,  pedibuB  per  mutua  nexis, 

Examen  subitum  ramo  frondente  pependit. 

Continuo  vates  "  Externum  cernimus  "  inquit 

"  Adventare  \drum,  et  partes  petere  agmen  easdem 

"  Partibus  ex  isdem,  et  summa  dominarier  arce."  70 

Praeterea,  castis  adolet  dum  altaria  taedis, 

Ut  juxta  genitorem  adstat  Lavinia  virgo, 

Visa-nefas  !-longis  comprendere  crinibus  ignem, 

Atque  omnem  ornatum  flamma  crepitante  cremari, 

Regalesque  accensa  comas,  accensa  coronam,  75 

Insignem  gemmis  ;  tum  fumida  lumine  fulvo 

Involvi,  ac  totis  Vulcanum  spargere  tectis. 

Id  vero  horrendum  ac  visu  mirabile  ferri : 

Namque  fore  illustrem  fama  fatisque  canebant 

Ipsam,  sed  populo  magnum  j)ortendere  bellum.  80 

At  rex  soUicitus  monstris,  oracula  Fauni, 

Fatidici  genitoris,  adit,  lucosque  sub  alta 

Consulit  Albunea,  nemorum  quae  maxima  sacro 

Fonte  sonat,  saevamque  exhalat  opaca  mephitim. 

Hinc  Italae  gentes  omnisque  Oenotria  tellus  85 

In  dubiis  responsa  petunt.     Huc  dona  sacerdos 

Quum  tulit,  et  caesarum  ovium  sub  nocte  silenti 

PeUibus  incubuit  stratis,  somnosque  petivit ; 

Multa  modis  simulacra  videt  volitantia  miris, 


150  AENEIDOS   LIB.    VII. 

Et  varias  audit  voces,  fruiturque  deorum  90 

Colloquio,  atque  imis  Aclieronta  aiFatur  Avernis. 
Hic  et  tunc  pater  ipse  petens  responsa  Latinus 
Oentum  lanigeras  mactabat  rite  bidentes, 
A-tque  harum  eifultus  tergo  stratisque  jacebat 
Velleribus  :  subita  ex  alto  vox  reddita  luco  est :  95 

'•  Ne  pete  connubiis  natam  sociare  Latinis, 
"  0  mea  progenies,  tbalamis  neu  crede  paratis  : 
"  Externi  veniunt  generi,  qui  sanguine  nostrum 
"  Nomen  in  astra  ferant,  quorumque  ab  stirpe  nepotes 
"  Omnia  sub  pedibus,  qua  Sol  utrumque  recurrens       100 
"  Adspicit  Oceanum,  vertique  regique  videbunt/' 
Haec  responsa  patris  Fauni  monitusque  silenti 
Nocte  datos  non  ipse  suo  premit  ore  Latinus ; 
Sed  circum  late  volitans  jam  Fama  per  urbes 
Ausonias  tulerat,  quum  Laomedontia  pubes  105 

Gramineo  ripae  religavit  ab  aggere  classem. 
Aeneas  primique  duces  et  pulcber  lulus 
Corpora  sub  ramis  deponunt  arboris  altae, 
Instituuntque  dapes,  et  adorea  liba  per  herbam 
Subjiciunt  epulis-sic  Jupiter  ij)se  monebat-,  110 

Et  Cereale  solum  pomis  agrestibus  -augent, 
Consumtis  bic  forte  aliis,  ut  vertere  morsus 
Exiguam  in  Cererem  penuria  adegit  edendi 
Et  violare  manu  malisque  audacibus  orbcm 
Fatalis  crusti,  j)atulis  nec  parcere  quadris  ;  115 

*'  Heus  I  etiam  mensas  consumimus  ?  "  inquit  lulus, — 
Nec  plura  alludens.     Ea  vox  audita  laborum 
Prinia  tulit  finem,  primamque  loquentis  ab  ore 
Eripuit  pater  ac  stupcfactus  numine  pressit. 
Continuo  "  Salve  fatis  mibi  dcbita  tellus,  120 

*'  Vosque  "  ait  "  o  fidi  Trojae  salvete  Penates ! 
"  Hic  domus,  haec  ]3atria  cst  :  gcnitor  mihi  talia-namquo 
*'  Nunc  repeto-Anchises  fatorum  arcana  reliquit. 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    VII.  151 

"  *  Qimm  te,  nate,  fames  ignota  ad  litora  vectum 

"  '  Accisis  coget  dapibus  consumere  mensas,  125 

"  '  Tum  sperare  domos  defessus,  ibique  memento 

"  '  Prima  locare  manu  molirique  aggere  tecta.'  " 

"  Haec  erat  illa  fames  ;  haec  nos  suprema  manebat, 

"  Exitiis  positura  modum. 

"  Quare  agite  et  primo  laeti  cum  lumine  solis,  130 

'''  Quae  loca,  qnivo  liabeant  homines,  ubi  moenia  gentis, 

"  Vestigemus,  et  a  portu  diversa  petamus. 

"  Nunc  pateras  libate  Jovi,  precibusque  vocate 

"  Anchisen  genitorem,  et  vina  reponite  mensis." 

Sic  deinde  efifatus  frondenti  tempora  ramo  135 

Implicat,  et  Geniumc[ue  loci  primamque  deorum 

Tellurem  nymphasque  et  adhuc  ignota  precatur 

Fkimina,  tum  Noctem  Noctisque  orientia  signa 

Idaeumque  Jovem  Phrygiamque  ex  ordine  matrem 

Invocat,  et  duplices  Coeloque  Ereboque  parentes.         140 

Hic  pater  omnipotens  ter  coelo  clarus  ab  alto 

Intonuit,  radiisque  ardentem  lucis  et  auro 

Ipse  manu  quatiens  ostendit  ab  aethere  nubem. 

Diditur  hic  subito  Trojana  per  agmina  rumor, 

Advenisse  diem,  quo  debita  moenia  condant ;  145 

Certatim  instaurant  epulas,  atque  omine  magno 

Crateras  laeti  statuunt  et  vina  coronant. 

Postera  quum  prima  lustrabat  lampade  terras 
Orta  dies ;  urbem  et  fines  et  Ktora  gentis 
Diversi  explorant :  haec  fontis  stagna  Numici,  150 

Hunc  Thybrim  fluvium,  hic  fortes  habitare  Latinos. 
Tum  satus  Anchisa  delectos  ordine  ab  omni 
Centum  oratores  augusta  ad  moenia  regis 
Ire  jubet,  ramis  velatos  Palladis  omnes, 
Donaque  ferre  viro,  pacemque  exposccre  Teucris.  155 

Haud  mora,  festinant  jussi  rapidisque  feruntur 
Passibus.     Ipse  humili  designat  moenia  fossa, 


152  AENEIDOS    LIB.    Vll. 

Moliturque  locum,  primasquc  iii  litore  secles 

Castrorum  in  morem  pinnis  atque  aggere  cingit. 

Jamque  iter  emensi,  turres  ac  tecta  Latinorum  160 

Ardua  cernebant  juvenes,  muroque  subibant : 

Ante  urbem  pueri  et  primaevo  ilore  juventus 

Exercentur  equis,  domitantque  in  pulvere  currus, 

Aut  acres  tendunt  arcus,  aut  lenta  lacertis 

Spicula  contorquent,  cursuque  ictuque  lacessunt ;         165 

Quum  praevectus  equo  longaevi  regis  ad  aures 

Nuntius  ingentes  ignota  in  veste  reportat 

Advenisse  viros.     IUe  intra  tecta  vocari 

Imperat,  et  solio  medius  consedit  avito. 

Tectum  augustum,  ingens,  centum  sublime  columnis,  170 

Urbe  fuit  summa,  Laurentis  res^ia  Pici, 

Horrendum  silvis  et  religione  parentum. 

Hic  sceptra  accipere  et  primos  attollere  fasces 

Eegibus  omen  erat ;  boc  illis  curia  templum, 

Hae  sacris  sedes  epulis  ;  bic  ariete  caeso  175 

Perpetuis  soliti  patres  considere  mensis. 

Quin  ctiam  veterum  effigies  ex  ordine  avorum 

Antiqua  e  cedro,  Italusque,  paterque  Sabinus. 

Vitisator  curvam  sorvans  sub  imagine  falcem, 

Saturnusque  senex,  Janique  bifrontis  imago,  180 

Vcstibulo  adstabant,  aliique  ab  origine  reges, 

Martia  qui  ob  patriam  pugnando  vulnera  passi. 

Multaque  praeterea  sacris  in  postibus  arma, 

Captivi  pendent  currus,  curvaeque  secures 

Et  cristae  capitum,  ct  portarum  iugentia  claustra,       185 

Spiculaque  clipeique  creptaque  rostra  carinis. 

Ipse  Quirinali  lituo  parvaque  sedebat 

Succinctus  trabea,  laevaque  ancile  gerebat 

Picus,  equum  domitor;  qucm  capta  cupidinc  conjux, 

Aurea  percussum  virga  versumque  venenis,  190 

Fccit  avem  Circc,  sparsitque  coloribus  alas. 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    VII.  153 

Tali  intus  templo  divum  patriaque  Latinus 
Sede  sedens  Teucros  ad  scse  in  tecta  vocavifr, 
Atque  haec  ingressis  placido  prior  edidit  ore  : 
"  Dicite,  Dardanidae-neque  enim  nescimus  et  urbem  195 
"  Et  genus,  auditique  advertitis  aequore  cursum-, 
"  Quid  petitis  ?  quae  causa  rates  aut  cujus  egentes 
'\Litus  ad  Ausonium  tot  per  vada  caerula  vexit  ? 
'•  Sive  errore  viae,  seu  tempestatibus  acti- 
'^  Qualia  multa  mari  nautae  patiuntur  in  alto-  200 

"  Fluminis  intrastis  ripas  portuque  sedetis  ; 
"  Ne  fugite  liospitium,  neve  ignorate  Latinos 
"  Saturni  gentem,  liaud  vinclo  nec  legibus  aequam, 
"  Sponte  sua  veterisque  dei  se  more  tenentem. 
"  Atque  equidem  memini-foma  est  obscurior  annis-      205 
"  Auruncos  ita  ferre  senes,  liis  ortus  ut  agris 
"  Dardanus  Idaeas  Phrygiae  penetrarit  ad  urbes 
"  Threiciamque  Samon,  quac  nunc  Samothracia  fertur. 
"  Hinc  illum,  Corytlii  Tyrrhena  ab  sede  profectura, 
"  Aurea  nunc  solio  stellantis  regia  coeli  210 

"  Accipit,  et  numerum  divorum  altaribus  addit,' 
Dixerat,  et  dicta  Ilioneus  sic  voce  secutus  : 
"  Kex,  genus  egregium  Fauni,  nec  fluctibus  actos 
"  Atra  subegit  hiems  vestris  succedere  terris, 
"  Nec  sidus  regione  viae  litusve  fefellit ;  215 

"  ConsiKo  hanc  omnes  animisque  volentibus  urbem 
"  Afferimur,  pulsi  regnis,  quae  maxima  quondam 
"  Extremo  veniens  Sol  adspiciebat  Olympo. 
"  Ab  Jove  principium  generis  :  Jove  Dardana  pubes 
"  Gaudet  avo ;  rex  ipse  Jovis  de  gente  suprema,  220 

"  Troius  Aeneas,  tua  nos  ad  limina  misit, 
"  Quanta  per  Idaeos  saevis  effusa  Mycenis 
"'  Tempestas  ierit  campos,  quibus  actus  uterque 
' '  Europae  atque  Asiae  fatis  concurrerit  orbis, 
*  Audiit,  et'si  quem  telhis  extrema  refuso  225 


154  AENEIDOS    LIB.    VII. 

"  Submovet  Occano,  et  si  qucm  extenta  plagarum 

"  Quatuor  in  medio  dirimit  plaga  solis  iniqui. 

"  Diluvio  ex  illo  tot  vasta  per  aequora  vecti 

"  Dis  sedem  exiguam  patriis  litusque  rogamus 

"  Innocuura,  et  cunctis  undamque  auramque  patentem.  230 

"  Non  crimus  regno  indecores  ;  nec  vestra  feretur 

"Fama  levis,  tantique  abolescet  gratia  facti; 

"  Nec  Trojam  Ausonios  gremio  excepisse  pigebit. 

"  Fata  per  Aeneae  juro  dextramque  potentem, 

"  Sive  fide  seu  quis  bello  est  expertus  et  armis  :  235 

"  Multi  nos  populi,  multae-ne  temne,  quod  ultro 

"  Praeferimus  manibus  vittas  ac  verba  precantia- 

"  Et  petiere  sibi  et  voluere  adjungere  gentes ; 

"  Sed  nos  fata  deiim  vestras  exquirere  terras 

"  Imperiis  egere  suis.     Hinc  Dardanus  ortus  :  240 

"  Huc  repetit ;  jussisque  ingentibus  urget  Apollo 

li  Tyrrhenum  ad  Thybrim  et  fontis  vada  sacra  Numici. 

"  Dat  tibi  praeterea  fortunae  parva  prioris 

"  Munera,  reliquias  Troja  ex  ardente  receptas. 

"  Hoc  pater  Anchises  auro  libabat  ad  aras  ;  245 

"  Hoc  Priami  gestamen  erat,  quum  jura  vocatis 

"  More  daret  populis,  sceptrumque,  sacerque  tiaras, 

"  Iliadumque  labor  vestcs." 

Talibus  Ilionei  dictis  defixa  Latinus 

Obtutu  tenet  ora,  soloque  immobilis  haeret,  250 

Intentos  volvcns  oculos.     Nec  purpura  regem 

Picta  movet,  nec  sceptra  movent  Priameia  tantum, 

Quantum  in  connubio  natae  thalamoque  moratur, 

Et  veteris  Fauni  volvit  sub  pectore  sortem. 

Hunc  iHum  fatis  externa  ab  sede  profectum  255 

Portendi  gcnerum,  paribusque  in  regna  vocari 

Auspiciis ;  huic  progeniem  virtute  futuram 

Egregiam,  et  totum  quae  viribus  occupet  orbem. 

Tandem  laetus  ait :  "  Di  nostra  inccpta  secundent 


AENEIDOS    LI13.    VII.  155 

"  Augurmmqne  suum  !    Dabitur,  Trojane,  quod  oplas,  260 

"  Munera  nec  sperno.     Non  vobis,  rege  Latijio, 

"  Divitis  uber  agri  Trojacve  opulcntia  deerit. 

"  Ipse  modo  Aeneas,  nostri  si  tanta  cupido  est, 

'*  Si  jungi  hospitio  properat  sociusque  vocari, 

"  Adveniat,  vultus  nevo  exhorrescat  amicos  :  265 

"  Pars  mibi  pacis  erit  dextram  tetigisse  tyranni. 

"  Vos  contra  regi  mea  nunc  mandata  referte. 

"  Est  mibi  nata,  viro  gentis  quam  jungere  nostrae 

"  Non  patrio  ex  adyto  sortes,  non  plurima  coelo 

"  Monstra  sinunt :  generos  externis  affore  ab  oris,         270 

"  Hoc  Latio  restare  canunt,  qui  sanguine  nostrum 

"  Nomen  in  astra  ferant.     Hunc  illum  poscere  fata 

"  Et  reor  et,  si  quid  veri  mens  augurat,  opto." 

Haec  effatus,  equos  numero  pater  eligit  omni- 

Stabant  ter  centum  nitidi  in  praesepibus  altis- :  275 

Omnibus  extemplo  Teucris  jubet  ordine  duci 

Instratos  ostro  alipedes  pictisque  tapetis- 

Aurea  pectoribus  demissa  monilia  pendent ; 

Tecti  auro,  fulvum  mandunt  sub  dentibus  aurum- ; 

Absenti  Aeneae  currum  geminosque  jugales  280 

Semine  ab  aetberio,  spirantes  naribus  ignem, 

IUorum  de  gente,  patri  quos  daedala  Circe 

Supposita  de  matre  nothos  furata  creavit, 

Talibus  Aeneadae  donis  dictisque  Latiui 

Sublimes  in  cquis  redeunt,  pacemque  reportant.  285 

Ecce  autem  Inacbiis  scsereferebat  ab  Argis 
Sacva  Jovis  conjux,  aurasque  invccta  tenebat ; 
Et  laetum  Aenean  classemque  ex  aethere  longe 
Dardaniam  Siculo  prospexit  ab  usque  Pacbyno. 
Moliri  jam  tecta  videt,  jam  fidere  terrae  ;  290 

Desevuisse  rates.     Stetit  acri  fixa  dolore  ; 
Tum  quassans  caput,  baec  effundit  pectore  dicta : 
"  Hcu  stirpem  invisam  ct  fatis  contraria  nostris 


156  AENEIDOS    LIB.    VII. 

"  Fata  Phrygum  !  num  Sigeis  occumbeic  campis, 

"  Num  capti  potuere  capi  ?  num  incensa  cremavit       295 

"  Troja  viros  ?     Medias  acies  mediosque  per  ignes 

''  Invenere  viam.     At,  credo,  mea  numina  tandem 

"  Fessa  jacent,  odiis  aut  exsaturata  quievi. — 

"  Quin  etiam  patria  excussos  infesta  per  undas 

"  Ausa  sequi,  et  profugis  toto  me  opponere  ponto.        300 

"  Absumtae  in  Teucros  vires  coelique  luarisque. 

"  Quid  Syrtes  aut  Scylla  mihi,  quid  vasta  Charybdis 

"  Profuit  ?     Optato  conduntur  Thybridis  alveo, 

•'  Securi  pelagi  atque  mei.     Mars  perdere  gentem 

"  Immanem  Lapithum  valuit ;  concessit  in  iras  305 

"  Ipse  deum  antiquam  genitor  Calydona  Dianae :     [tem  ? 

"  Quod  scclus  aut  Lapithas  tantum,  aut  Calydona  meren- 

"  Ast  ego,  magna  Jovis  conjux,  nil  linquere  inausum 

*'  Quae  potui  infelix,  quae  memet  in  omnia  verti,         309 

'' Vincorab  Aenea  !  Quodsimeanuminanonsimt  [quamest. 

"'  Magna  satis,  dubitem  haud  equidem  implorare  quod  us- 

"  Flectere  si  nequeo  Superos,  Acheronta  movebo.        312 

"  Non  dabitur  regnis,  esto,  prohibere  Latinis, 

"  Atque  immota  manet  fatis  Lavinia  conjux  ; 

"  At  trahere  atque  moras  tantis  licet  addere  rebus,       315 

"  At  licet  amborum  populos  exscindere  regum. 

"  Hac  gener  atque  socer  coeant  mercede  suorum. 

"  Sanguine  Trojano  et  Eutulo  dotabere,  virgo, 

"  Et  Bellona  manet  te  pronuba.     Ncc  face  tantum 

"  Ciss_eis  praegnans  ignes  enixa  jugalcs  ;  820 

"  Quin  idem  Veneri  partus  suus  et  Paris  alter, 

'"  Funcstaeque  itcrum  rccidiva  in  Pergama  taedae. ' 

Haec  ubi  dicta  dedit,  tcrras  horrenda  petivit. 

Luctificam  AUecto  dirarum  ab  sede  doarum 

Infernisquc  cict  tencbris,  cui  tristia  beUa  325 

Iraeque  insidiaeque  et  crimina  noxia  cordi. 

Odit  et  ipse  })ator  Pbitoii,  odore  sorores 


AENEIDOS    LIB.     VII.  157 

Tartareae  monstrum  :  tot  scse  vertit  in  ora, 

Tam  saevae  facies,  tot  puUulat  atra  colubris. 

Quam  Juno  his  acuit  verbis,  ac  talla  fatur :  33C 

"  Hunc  mihi  da  proprium,  virgo  sata  Nocte,  laborcm, 

"  Hanc  operam,  ne  noster  honos  infractave  cedat 

"  Fama  loco,  neu  connubiis  ambire  Latinum 

''  Aeneadae  possint  Italosve  obsidere  fines. 

"  Tu  potes  unanimos  armare  in  proelia  fratres,  335 

"  Atque  odiis  versarc  domos,  tu  verbera  tectis 

"  Funereasque  inferre  faces  ;  tibi  nomina  mille, 

"  Mille  nocendi  artes  :  fecundum  concute  pectus, 

"  Disjice  compositam  pacem,  sere  crimina  belli ; 

"  Arma  velit  poscatque  simul  rapiatque  juventus  !  "     340 

Exin  Gorgoneis  Allecto  infecta  venenis 
Principio  Latium  et  Laurentis  tecta  tyranni 
Celsa  petit,  tacitumque  obsedit  limen  Amatae, 
Quam  super  adventu  Teucrum  Turnique  hymenaeis 
Femincae  ardentem  curaeque  iraeque  coquebant.  345 

Huic  dea  caeruleis  unum  de  crinibus  anguem 
Conjicit,  inque  sinum  praecordia  ad  iutima  subdit, 
Quo  furibunda  domum  monstro  permisceat  omnem. 
Ille,  inter  vestes  et  levia  pectora  lapsus, 
Volvitur  attactu  nuUo  fallitque  furentem,  350 

Vipeream  iuspirans  animam :  fit  tortile  coUo 
Aurum  ingens  coluber,  fit  longae  taenia  vittae, 
Innectitque  comas,  et  membris  lubricus  errat. 
Ac  dum  prima  lues  udo  sublapsa  veneno 
Pertentat  sensus,  atque  ossibus  implicat  ignem,  355 

Necdum  animus  toto  percepit  pectore  flammam  ; 
Mollius  et  solito  matrum  de  more  loquuta  est, 
Multa  super  natae  lacrimans  Phrygiisque  hymenaeis : 
"  Exsuhbusne  datur  ducenda  Lavinia  Teucris, 
"  0  genitor,  nec  te  miseret  gnataeque  tuique,  360 

''  Nec  matris  miseret,  quam  primo  aquilone  relinquet 


158  AENEIDOS    LIB.    VII. 

"  Perfidus,  alta  petens  abducfa  virgine  praedo  ? 

"  At  non  sic  Phrygius  penctrat  Lacedaemona  pastor, 

"  Ledaeamque  Hclenam  Trojanas  vexit  ad  urbes  ! 

'•  Quid  tua  sancta  fides  .^  quid  cura  antiqua  tuorum,  3G5 

"  Et  consanguineo  toties  data  dextera  Turno  ? 

"  Si  gener  externa  petitur  de  gente  Latinis, 

"  Idque  sedct,  Faunique  premunt  te  jussa  parentis : 

"  Omnem  equidem  sceptris  terram  quae  libera  nostris 

"  Dissidet,  externam  reor,  et  sic  dicere  divos.  370 

'^  Et  Turno,  si  prima  domus  repetatur  origo, 

"  Inachus  Acrisiusque  patres  mediaeque  Mycenae." 

His  ubi  nequidquam  dictis  experta  Latinum 

Contra  stare  videt,  penitusque  in  viscera  lapsum 

Serpentis  furiale  malum,  totamquc  pererrat ;  375 

Tum  vero  infelix,  ingentibus  excita  monstris, 

Immensam  sine  more  furit  lymphata  per  urbem : 

Ceu  quondam  torto  volitans  sub  verbere  turbo, 

Quem  pueri  magno  in  gyro  vacua  atria  circum 

Intenti  ludo  exercent :  ille  actus  habena  380 

Curvatis  fertur  spatiis ;  stupet  inscia  supra 

Impubesque  manus,  mirata  volubile  buxum  ; 

Dant  animos  plagae.     Non  cursu  segnior  illo 

Per  medias  urbes  agitur  populosque  feroces, 

Quin  etiam  in  silvas,  simulato  numine  Bacchi,  385 

Majus  adorta  nefas  majoremque  orsa  furorem, 

Evolat,  ct  natam  frondosis  montibus  abdit, 

Quo  thalamum  eripiat  Tcucris  taedasque  morctur, 

Evoe  Bacchc  frcmens,  sohim  tc  virginc  dignum 

Vociferans  :  eteuim  molles  tibi  sumere  thyrsos,  390 

Tc  lustrare  choro,  sacrum  tibi  pascere  crinem. 

Fama  volat,  furiisquc  accensas  pcctore  matrcs 

Idem  omncs  simul  ardor  agit  nova  quaerere  tecta. 

Deseruere  domos  ;  ventis  dant  colla  comasque. 

Aist  aliae  trcniulis  ululatibus  aetliora  complent,  395 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    VII.  159 

Pampineasque  gerunt  incinctae  pellibus  liastas. 

Ipsa  inter  medias  flagrantem  fervida  pinum 

Sustinet,  ac  natae  Turnique  canit  liymenaeos, 

Sanguineam  torquens  aciem,  torvumque  repente 

Clamat :  "  lo  matres,"  audite,  ubi  quaeque,  Latinae !    400 

"  Si  qua  piis  animis  manet  infelicis  Amatae 

"  Gratia,  si  juris  materni  cura  remordet  ; 

"  Solvite  crinales  vittas,  capite  orgia  mecum !  " 

Talem  inter  silvas,  inter  deserta  ferarum, 

Keginam  AUecto  stimulis  agit  undique  Bacclii.  405 

Postquam  visa  satis  primos  acuisse  furores, 
Consiliumque  omnemque  domum  vertisse  Latini ; 
Protenus  liinc  fuscis  tristis  dea  toUitur  alis 
Audacis  Kutuli  ad  muros,-quam  dicitur  urbem 
Acrisioneis  Danae  fundasse  colonis,-  410 

Praecipiti  delata  Noto.     Locus  Ardea  quondam 
Dictus  avis  :  et  nunc  magnum  manet  Ardea  nomen ; 
Sed  fortuna  fuit.     Tectis  bic  Turnus  in  altis 
Jam  mediam  nigra  carpebat  nocte  quietem  : 
AUecto  torvam  faciem  et  furialia  membra  415 

Exuit ;  in  vultus  sese  transformat  aniles, 
Et  frontem  obscenam  rugis  arat ;  induit  albos 
Cum  vitta  crines,  tum  ramum  innectit  olivae  ; 
Eit  Calybe  Junonis  anus  templique  sacerdos, 
Et  juveni  ante  oculos  bis  se  cum  vocibus  offert :  420 

"  Turne,  tot  incassum  fusos  patiere  labores, 
"  Et  tua  Dardaniis  transscribi  sceptra  colonis  ? 
"  Kex  tibi  conjugium  et  quaesitas  sanguine  dotes 
"  Abnegat,  externusque  in  regnum  quaeritur  beres. 
"  I  nunc,  ingratis  offer  te,  irrise,  periclis  ;  425 

"  Tyrrbenas,  i,  sterne  acies ;  tege  pace  Latinos. 
"  Haec  adeo  tibi  me,  placida  quum  nocte  jaceres, 
'^  Ipsa  palam  fari  omnipotens  Saturnia  jussit. 
"  Quare  age,  et  armari  pubem  portisque  moveri 


160  AENEIDOS    LIB.    VII. 

"  Laetus  in  arrna  para,  ct  Phrygios,  qui  flumine  pulcliro  430 

"  Consedcre,  duces  pictasque  exure  carinas. 

'*'  Coelestum  vis  magna  jubet.     Kex  ipse  Latinus, 

"  Ni  dare  conjugium  et  dicto  parere  fatetur, 

"  Sentiat  et  tandem  Turnum  experiatur  in  armis." 

Hic  juvenis,  vatem  irridens,  sic  orsa  vicissim  435 

Orc  refert:  "  Classes  invectas  Thybridis  undam, 

"  Non,  ut  rere,  meas  effugit  nuntius  aures- 

"  Ne  tantos  mihi  finge  metus-,  nec  regia  Juno 

"  Immemor  est  nostri ; 

''  Sed  te  victa  situ  verique  effeta  senectus,  440 

"  0  mater,  curis  nequidquam  exercet,  et  arma 

"  Kegum  inter  falsa  vatem  formidine  ludit. 

"  Cura  tibi  divtim  effigies  et  tcmpla  tueri ; 

"  Bella  viri  paccmque  gerant,  quis  bella  gerenda." 

Talibus  Allecto  dictis  exarsit  in  iras.  445 

At  juveni  oranti  subitus  tremor  occupat  artus  ; 

Deriguere  oculi :  tot  Erinys  sibilat  hydris, 

Tantaque  se  facies  aperit.     Tum  flammea  torquens 

Lumina,  cunctantem  et  quaercntem  dicere  plura 

Kepulit,  et  geminos  erexit  criuibus  angues,  450 

Verberaque  iusonuit,  rabidoque  hacc  addidit  ore : 

"  En,  ego  victa  situ,  quam  veri  effeta  senectus 

"  Arma  inter  regum  falsa  formidine  ludit- 

"  Kespice  ad  haec-,  adsum  dirarum  ab  sede  sororum ; 

"  Bella  manu  letumque  gero."  455 

Sic  effata,  facem  juveni  conjecit,  et  atro 

Lumine  fumantes  fixit  sub  pcctorc  tacdas. 

OUi  somnum  ingcns  rumpit  pavor,  ossaque  ct  artus 

Perfundit  toto  proruptus  corpore  sudor. 

Arma  amens  fremit,  arma  toro  tcctisque  requirit.  4G0 

Saevit  amor  ferri,  et  scelerata  insauia  belli, 

L'a  super  :  magno  veluti  quum  flamma  sonore 

Virgea  suggeritur  costis  undantis  ahcni, 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    VII.  161 

Exsiiltantque  aestii  latices,  furit  intus  aquai 

Fumidus  atque  alte  spumis  cxuberat  amnis,  465 

Nec  jam  se  capit  unda,  volat  vapor  ater  ad  auras. 

Ergo  iter  ad  regem  polluta  pace  Latinum 

Indicit  primis  juvenum,  et  jubet  arma  parari, 

Tutari  Italiam,  detrudere  finibus  hostem : 

Se  satis  ambobus  Teucrisque  venire  Latinisque.  470 

Haec  ubi  dicta  dedit,  divosque  in  vota  vocavit ; 

Certatim  sese  Rutuli  exliortantur  in  arma : 

Hunc  decus  egregium  formae  movet  atque  juventae, 

Hunc  atavi  regcs,  liunc  claris  dextera  factis. 

Dum  Turnus  Eutulos  animis  audacibus  implet,      475 
AUecto  in  Teucros  Stygiis  se  concitat  alis, 
Arte  nova  speculata  locum,  quo  litore  pulcher 
Insidiis  cursuque  feras  agitabat  lulus. 
Hic  subitam  canibus  rabiem  Cocytia  virgo 
Objicit,  et  noto  nares  contingit  odore,  480 

TJt  cervum  ardentes  agerent :  quae  prima  laborum 
Causa  fiiit,  belloque  animos  accendit  agrestes. 
Cervus  erat  forma  praestanti  et  cornibus  ingens, 
Tjrrhidae  pueri  quem  matris  ab  ubere  raptum 
Nutribant  Tyrrheusque  pater,  cui  regia  j)arent  485 

Armenta  et  lati  custodia  credita  campi. 
Assuetum  imperiis  soror  omni  Silvia  cura 
Mollibus  intexens  ornabat  cornua  sertis, 
Pectebatque  ferum,  puioque  in  fonte  lavabat. 
lUe,  manum  patiens  mensaeque  assuetus  herili,  490 

Errabat  silvis,  rursusque  ad  limina  nota 
Ipse  domiim  sera  quamvis  se  nocte  ferebat. 
Hunc  procul  errantem  rabidae  venantis  luli 
Commovere  canes,  fluvio  quum  forte  secundo 
Deiiueret  ripaqiie  aestus  viridante  levaret.  495 

Ipsc  etiam,  eximiae  laiidis  siiccensus  amore, 
•  A-Scanius  ciirvo  direxit  spicula  cornii ; 


162  AENEIDOS    LIB.    VII. 

Nec  dextrae  erranti  deus  afuit,  actaque  multo 

Perque  uterum  sonitu  perque  ilia  venit  arundo. 

Saucius  at  quadrupes  nota  intra  tecta  refugit,  500 

Successitque  gemens  stabulis,  questuque  cruentus 

Atque  imploranti  similis  tectum  omne  replebat. 

Silvia  prima  soror,  palmis  percussa  lacertos, 

Auxilium  vocat  et  duros  conclamat  agrestes. 

Olli-pestis  enim  tacitis  latet  aspera  silvis-  505 

Improvisi  adsunt,  liic  torre  armatus  obusto, 

Stipitis  liic  gravidi  nodis  :  quod  cuique  repertum 

Kimanti,  tclum  ira  facit.     Yocat  agmina  Tyrrlieus, 

Quadrifidam  quercum  cuneis  ut  forte  coactis 

Scindebat,  rapta  spirans  immane  securi.  510 

At  saeva  e  speculis  tempus  dca  nacta  nocendi, 

Ardua  tecta  petit  stabuli,  et  de  culmine  summo 

Pastorale  canit  signum,  cornuque  recurvo 

Tartaream  intendit  vocem  :  qua  protenus  omne 

Contremuit  nemus  et  silvae  insonuere  profundae  ;         515 

Audiit  et  Triviae  longe  lacus,  audiit  amnis 

Sulfurea  Nar  albus  aqua,  fontesque  Velini ; 

Et  trepidae  matres  pressere  ad  pectora  natos. 

Tum  vero  ad  vocem  celeres,  qua  buccina  signum 

Dira  dedit,  raptis  concurrunt  undique  telis  520 

Indomiti  agricolae  ;  nec  non  et  Troia  pubes 

Ascanio  auxilium  castris  elTundit  apertis. 

Direxere  acies.     Non  jam  certamine  agresti 

Stipitibus  duris  agitur  sudibusve  praeustis ; 

Sed  fcrro  ancipiti  decernunt,  atraque  latc  525 

Horreseit  strictis  seges  ensibus,  aeraque  fulgent 

Sole  lacessita  et  lucem  sub  nubila  jactant : 

Fhictus  uti  primo  coepit  quum  alb^scere  ponto, 

Paullatim  sese  tollit  mare  et  altius  undas 

Erigit,  inde  imo  consurgit  ad  aethera  fundo.  530 

Ilic  juvenis  primam  ante  aciem  stridentc  sagitta. 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    VII.  163 

Natorum  Tyrrliei  fuerat  qui  maximus,  Almo 
Sternitur  :  liaesit  enim  sub  gutture  vulnus,  et  udae 
Vocis  iter  tenuemquc  inclusit  sanguine  vitam. 
Corpora  multa  virum  circa,  seniorque  Galaesus,  535 

Dum  paci  medium  se  offert,  justissimus  unus 
Qui  fuit  Ausoniisque  olim  ditissimus  arvis  : 
Quinque  greges  illi  balantum,  quina  redibant 
Armenta,  et  terram  centum  vertebat  aratris. 

Atque  ea  per  campos  aequo  dum  Marte  geruntur,  540 
Promissi  dea  focta  potens,  ubi  sanguine  bellum 
Imbuit  et  primae  commisit  funera  pugnae, 
Deserit  Hesperiam,  et,  coeli  conversa  per  auras, 
Junonem  victrix  affatur  voce  superba : 
"  En  perfecta  tibi  bello  discordia  tristi !  545 

"  Dic,  in  amicitiam  coeant  et  foedera  jungant  ! 
"  Quandoquidem  Ausonio  respersi  safiguine  Teucros, 
"  Hoc  etiam  bis  addam,  tua  si  mihi  certa  voluntas : 
"  ITinitimas  in  bella  feram  rumoribus  urbes, 
"  Accendamque  animos  insani  Martis  amore,  550 

"  Undique  ut  auxilio  vcniant ;  spargam  arma  per  agros." 
Tum  contra  Juno  :  "  Terrorum  et  fraudis  abunde  est. 
"  Stant  belli  causae  ;  pugnatur  comminus  armis  ; 
"  Qaae  fors  prima  dedit,  sanguis  novus  imbuit  arma. 
"  Talia  conjugia  et  tales  celebrent  bymenaeos  555 

"  Egregium  Veneris  genus  et  rex  ipse  Latinus. 
"  Te  super  aetberias  errare  licentius  auras, 
"  Haud  pater  ille  velit,  summi  regnator  Olympi . 
"  Cede  locis.     Ego,  si  qua  super  fortuna  laborum  est, 
"  Ipsa  regam."     Tales  dederat  Saturnia  voces  ;  560 

Illa  autem  attoUit  stridentes  anguibus  alas, 
Cocytique  petit  sedem,  supera  ardua  linquens. 
Est  locus  Italiae  medio  sub  moutibus  altis, 
Nobilis  et  fiima  multis  memoratus  iu  oris, 
Amsancti  valles  ;  densis  bunc  frondibus  atrum  565 


164  AENEIDOS   LIB.    VII. 

Urgct  utnmqiic  latiis  nemoris,  mcdioque  fragosus 
Dat  sonitum  saxis  et  torto  vertice  torrens. 
Hic  specus  horrendum  ct  saevi  spiracula  Ditis 
Monstrantur,  ruptoque  ingens  Aclieronte  vorago 
Pcstiferas  aperit  fauces  :  quis  condita  Erinys,  570 

Invisum  numen,  terras  coelumque  levabat. 

Nec  miuus  interea  extremam  Saturnia  bello 
Imponit  regina  manum.  Euit  omnis  in  urbem 
Pastorum  ex  acie  numerus,  caesosque  reportant 
Almonem  puerum  foedatique  ora  Galaesi,  575 

Implorantque  deos,  obtestanturque  Latinum. 
Turnus  adest,  medioque  in  crimine  caedis  et  igni 
Terrorem  ingeminat :  Teucros  in  regna  vocari, 
Stirpem  admisceri  Phrygiam,  se  limine  pelli. 
Tum,  quorum  attonitae  Baccho  nemora  avia  matres    580 
Insultant  thiasis-neque  cnim  leve  nomen  Amatae-, 
Undique  collecti  coeunt,  Martemque  fotigant. 
Uicet  infandum  cuncti  contra  omina  bellum, 
Contra  fata  deum,  perverso  numine  poscunt ; 
Certatim  regis  circumstant  tecta  Latini.  585 

lUe,  velut  pelagi  rupes  immota,  resistit, 
Ut  pelagi  rupes  magno  veniente  fragore, 
Quae  sese,  multis  circum  latrantibus  undis, 
Mole  tenet :  scopuli  nequidquam  et  spumea  circum 
Saxa  fremunt,  hiterique  illisa  refunditur  alga.  590 

Verum  ubi  nuUa  datur  caecum  exsupcrarc  potcstas 
Consilium,  et  saevae  nutu  Junonis  eunt  res ; 
Multa  deos  aurasque  pater  testatus  inanes, 
"  Frangimur  heu  fotis  "  inquit  "  ferimurque  procella  ! 
"  Ipsi  has  sacrilego  pcndetis  sanguine  poenas,  595 

"  0  miseri.     Te,  Turne,  neflis,  te  triste  manebit 
"  Supplicium,  votisque  dcos  vonerabcrc  scris. 
"  Nam  mihi  parta  quies,  omnisque  in  limine  portus ; 
"  Funcrc  fehci  spolior."     Ncc  plura  locutus 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    VII.  1C5 

Sepsit  se  tectis,  rerumque  reliquit  habenas.  600 

Mos  erat  Hesperio  in  Latio,  quem  protenus  urbca 
Albanae  coluere  sacrum,  nunc  maxima  rerum 
Roma  colit,  quum  prima  movent  in  proelia  Martem, 
Sive  Getis  inferre  manu  lacrimabile  bellum 
Hyrcanisve  ArabisTC  parant,  seu  tenclere  ad  Inclos        GOrj 
Auroramque  sequi  Partbosque  reposcere  signa, 
Sunt  geminae  Belli  portae-sic  nomine  dicunt- 
Eeligione  sacrae  et  saevi  formidine  Martis  ; 
Centum  aerei  claudunt  vectes  aeternaque  ferri 
Robora,  nec  custos  absistit  limine  Janus  :  610 

Has,  ubi  certa  sedet  patribus  sententia  pugnae, 
Ipse,  Quirinali  trabea  cinctuque  Gabino 
Insignis,  reserat  stridentia  limina  consul ; 
Ipse  vocat  pugnas,  sequitur  tum  cetera  pubes, 
Acreaque  adsensu  conspirant  cornua  rauco.  615 

Hoc  et  tum  Aeneadis  indicere  bella  Latinus 
More  jubcbatur,  tristesque  recludere  portas. 
Abstinuit  tactu  patcr,  aversusque  refugit 
Fol>da  ministeria,  et  caecis  se  condidit  umbris. 
Tum  regina  deum,  coelo  delapsa,  morantes  620 

Impulit  ipsa  manu  portas,  et  cardine  verso 
Belli  ferratos  rumpit  Saturnia  postes. 
Ardet  inexcita  Aus^nia  atque  immobilis  ante : 
Pars  pedes  ire  parat  campis,  pars  arduus  altis 
Pulverulentus  equis  furit ;  omnes  arma  requirunt.       625 
Pars  leves  clipeos  et  spicula  lucida  tergent 
Arvina  pingui,  subiguntque  in  cote  secures  ; 
Signaque  ferre  juvat,  sonitusque  audire  tubarum. 
Quinque  adco  magnae,  positis  incudibus  urbes 
Tcla  novant,  Atina  potens,  Tiburque  superbum,  630 

Ardea,  Crustumerique,  et  turrigerae  Antemnae. 
Tegmina  tuta  cavant  capitum,  flectuntque  salignas 
Umbonum  crates  ;  alii  thoracas  ahenos 


166  AENEIDOS   LIB.    VII. 

Aut  leves  ocreas  lento  ducunt  argento  : 

Vomeris  huc  et  falcis  lionos,  liuc  omnis  aratri  635 

Cessit  amor;  recoquunt  patrios  fornacibus  enses, 

Classica  jamque  souiint,  it  bello  tessera  signum. 

Hic  galeam  tectis  trepidus  rapit,  ille  frementes 

Ad  juga  cogit  cquos,  clipeumque  auroque  trilicem 

Loricam  induitur,  fidoque  accingitur  ense.  640 

Pandite  nunc  Helicona,  deae,  cantusque  movete, 
Qui  Lcllo  exciti  reges,  quae  qucmque  secutae 
Complerint  campos  acies^  quibus  Itala  jam  tum 
Floruerit  terra  alma  viHs,  quibus  arserit  armis : 
Et  meministis  enim,  divae,  et  memorare  potestis ;        645 
Ad  nos  vix  tenuis  famae  perlabitur  aura. 

Primus  init  bellum  Tyrrlienis  asper  ab  oris 
Contemtor  divum  Mezentius,  agminaque  armat. 
Filius  buic  juxta  Lausus,  quo  pulchrior  alter 
Non  fuit  excepto  Laurentis  corpore  Turni ;  650 

Lausus,  equum  domitor  debellatorque  ferarum, 
Ducit  Agyllina  nequidquam  ex  urbe  secutos 
Millc  viros,  dignus,  patriis  qui  laetior  esset 
Imperiis,  et  cui  pater  haud  Mezentius  esset. 

Post  hos  insignem  pahna  per  gramina  currum         655 
Victorcsque  ostentat  equos  satus  Hercule  pulchro 
Pulcher  Aventinus,  clipeoque  insigne  paternum 
Centum  angues  cinctamque  gerit  serpentibus  Hydiam : 
ColUs  Aventini  silva  quem  Rhea  sacerdos 
Furtivum  partu  sub  luminis  edidit  oras,  660 

Mixta  deo  muhcr,  postquam  Laurentia  victor 
Geryone  exstincto  Tirynthius  attigit  arva, 
Tyrrhenoque  boves  in  flumiue  hivit  Ibcras, 
Pila  manu  saevosque  gerunt  iu  bella  dolones, 
Et  tereti  pugnant  mucrone  veruque  Sabello.  665 

Ipse  pedes,  tegumen  torquens  immane  leonis, 
Tcrribili  impexum  scta  cum  dcntibus  albis, 


AENEIDOS    LIC.    VII.  1G7 

Indutus  capitij  sic  regia  tecta  subibat, 
Horridus,  Herculeoque  liumeros  innexus  amict  fl. 

Tum  gemini  fratres  Tiburtia  moenia  linquunt,        G70 
Fratris  Tiburti  dictam  cognomine  gentem, 
Catillusque  acerque  Coras,  Argiva  juventus, 
Et  primam  ante  aciem  densa  inter  tela  fcruntur, 
Ceu  duo  nubigenae  quum  vertice  montis  ab  alto 
Descendunt  Centauri,  Homolen  Othrymque  nivalem    G75 
Linquentes  cursu  rapido ;  dat  euntibus  ingens 
Silva  locum,  et  magno  cedunt  virgulta  fragore. 

Nec  Praenestinae  fundator  defuit  urbis, 
Vulcano  genitum  pecora  inter  agrestia  regem 
Inventumque  focis  omnis  quem  credidit  aetas,  680 

Caeculus.     Hunc  legio  late  comitatur  agrestis, 
Quique  altum  Praeneste  viri,  quique  arva  Gabinae 
Junonis  gelidumque  Anienem  et  roscida  rivis 
Hernica  saxa  colunt ;  quos  dives  Anagnia  pascit, 
Quos,  Amasene  pater.     Non  illis  omnibus  arma,  685 

Nec  clipei  currusve  sonant :  pars  maxima  glandes 
Liventis  plumbi  spargit ;  pars  sj^icula  gestat 
Bina  manu  ;  fulvosque  lupi  de  pelle  galeros 
Tegmen  babent  capiti ;  vestigia  nuda  sinistri 
Instituere  pedis,  crudus  tegit  altera  pero.  690 

At  Messapus,  equum  domitor,  Neptunia  proles, 
Quem  neque  fas  igni  cuiquam  nec  sternere  ferro, 
Jam  pridem  resides  populos  desuetaque  bello 
Agmina  in  arma  vocat  subito,  ferrumque  retractat. 
Hi  Fescenninas  acies  Aequosque  Faliscos,  695 

Hi  Soractis  liabent  arces  Flaviniaque  arva 
Et  Cimini  cum  monte  lacum  lucosque  Capenos. 
Ibant  aequati  numero,  rcgemque  canebant : 
Ceu  quondam  nivei  liquida  inter  nubila  cycni, 
Quum  sese  e  pastu  referunt  et  longa  canoros  700 

Dant  per  coUa  modos  ;  sonat  amnis  et  Asia  longe 


168  AENEIDOS   LIB.    VII. 

Piilsa  palus. 

Nec  qiiisquaiu  aeratas  acies  ex  aginine  tanto 

Misccii  putct,  aeriam  sed  gurgite  ab  alto 

Urgeri  volucrum  raucarum  ad  litora  nubera.  705 

Ecce  Sabinorum  prisco  de  sanguine  magnum 
Agraen  agens  Clausus,  magnique  ipse  agminis  instar, 
Claudia  nunc  a  quo  difTunditur  et  tribus  et  gens 
Pcr  Latiura,  postquam  iu  partem  data  Roma  Sabinis. 
Una  ingens  Amiterna  cobors  j)riscique  Quirites,  710 

Ereti  manus  omnis  oliviferaeque  Mutuscae, 
Qui  Nomentum  urbem,  qui  rosea  rura  Velini, 
Qui  Tetricae  horrentes  rupes  montemque  Severum 
Casperiamque  colunt  Forulosque  et  fiumen  Himellae, 
Qui  Tbybrim  Fabarimque  bibunt,  quos  frigida  misit    715 
Nursia,  et  Hortinae.classes  populique  Latini, 
Quosque  secans  infaustum  interluit  Allia  nomen : 
Quam  multi  Libyco  volvuntur  marmore  fluctus, 
Sacvus  ubi  Orion  bibernis  conditur  undis, 
Vel  quum  sole  novo  densae  torrontur  aristae  720 

Aut  Hermi  campo  aut  Lyciae  fiaventibus  arvis. 
Scuta  sonant,  pulsuque  pedum  contcrrita  tellus. 

Hinc  Agamemnonius,  Trojani  nominis  hostis, 
Curru  jungit  Halaesus  equos,  Turnoque  feroces 
Mille  rapit  populos,  vertunt  felicia  Baccbo  725 

Massica  qui  rastris,  et  quos  de  collibus  altis 
Aurunci  misere  patres  Sidicinaque  juxta 
Aequora,  quique  Cales  linquuut,  amnisque  vadosi 
Accola  Vulturni,  paritcrque  Saticulus  asper 
Oscorumque  manus.     Teretes  sunt  aclydes  illis  730 

Tela  ;  sed  baec  lento  mos  est  aptare  flagcllo. 
Lacvas  caetra  tegit ;  falcati  comminus  enses. 

Nec  tu  carminibus  nostris  indictus  abibis, 
Oebale,  quem  gcnerasse  Telon  Sebetbide  nympba 
Fertur,  Teleboiim  Capreas  quum  rcgna  teneret,  735 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    VII.  169 

Jam  senior  ;  patriis  secl  non  et  filius  arvis 
Contentus,  late  jam  tum  dicione  premebat 
Sarrastes  populos,  et  quae  rigat  aequora  Sarnus, 
Quique  Rufms  BatulumcLue  tenent  atque  arva  Celcnnae, 
Et  c[uos  maliferae  despectant  moenia  Abellae  :  740 

Teutonico  ritu  soliti  torquere  cateias ; 
Tegmina  quis  capitum  raptus  de  subere  cortex, 
Aerataeque  micant  peltae,  micat  aereus  ensis. 

Et  te  montosae  misere  in  proelia  Nersae, 
Ufens,  insignem  fama  et  felicibus  armis  :  745 

Horrida  praecipue  cui  gens  assuetaque  multo 
Venatu  nemorum,  cluris  Aequicula  glebis. 
Armati  terram  exercent,  semperci[ue  recentes 
Convectare  juvat  praedas  et  vivere  rapto. 

Quin  et  Marruvia  venit  de  gente  ^cerdos,  750 

Fronde  super  galeam  et  felici  comtus  oliva, 
Arcbippi  regis  missu,  fortissimus  Umbro, 
Vipereo  generi  et  graviter  spirantibus  bydris 
Spargere  qui  somnos  cantuc[ue  manuque  solebat, 
Mulcebatque  iras  et  morsus  arte  levabat.  755 

Sed  non  Dardaniae  medicari  cuspidis  ictum 
Evaluit,  neque  eum  juvere  in  vulnera  cantus 
Somniferi  et  Marsis  quaesitae  montibus  herbae. 
Te  nemus  Anguitiae,  vitrea  te  Fucinus  unda, 
Te  liquidi  flevere  lacus.  760 

Ibat  et  Hippolyti  proles  pulclierrima  bello, 
Virbius,  insignem  quem  mater  Aricia  misit, 
Eductum  Egeriae  lucis  bumentia  circum 
Litora,  pinguis  ubi  et  placabilis  ara  Dianae. 
Namque  ferunt  fama  Hippolytum,  postquam  arte  novercae 
Occiderit  patriasque  cxplerit  sanguine  poenas  766 

Turbatis  distractus  equis,  ad  sidera  rursus- 
Aetberia  et  superas  coeli  venisse  sub  auras, 
Paeoniis  revocatum  lierbis  et  amorc  Dianae. 
s 


170 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    VII. 


Tum  pater  omnipotens,  aliquem  indignatus  ab  umbris  770 

Mortalem  infernis  ad  lumina  surgere  vitae, 

Ipse  repertorem  medicinae  talis  et  artis 

Fulmine  Phoebigenam  Stygias  detrusit  ad  undas. 

At  Trivia  Hij)polytum  secretis  alma  recondit 

Sedibus,  ct  nymphae  Egeriae  nemorique  relegat,  775 

Solus  ubi  in  silvis  Italis  ignobilis  aevum 

Exigeret;  versoque  ubi  nomine  Virbius  esset, 

Unde  etiam  templo  Triviae  lucisque  sacratis 

Cornipedes  arcentur  equi,  quod  litore  currum 

Et  juvenem  monstris  pavidi  effudcre  marinis.  780 

Filius  ardentes  haud  secius  aequore  campi 

Exercebat  equos,  curruque  in  bella  ruebat. 

Ipse  inter  primos  praestanti  corpore  Turnus 
Vertitur  arma  tenen??,  et  toto  vertice  supra  est : 
Cui  trijDlici  crinita  juba  galea  alta  Chimaeram  785 

Sustinet,  Aetnaeos  efflantem  faucibus  ignes-: 
Tam  magis  illa  fremens  et  tristibus  cffera  flammis, 
Quam  magis  effuso  crudescunt  sanguiue  pugnae-; 
At  levcm  clipeum  sublatis  cornibus  lo 
Auro  insignibat,  jam  setis  obsita,  jam  bos,  790 

Argumentum  ingens,  et  custos  virginis  Argus, 
Caelataque  amnem  fundens  pater  Inachus  urna. 
Insequitur  nimbus  peditum,  clipeataque  totis 
Agmina  densentur  campis,  Argivaquc  pubes 
Auruncaeque  manus,  Rutuli,  veteresque  Sicani,  795 

Et  Sacranae  acies,  et  picti  scuta  Labici : 
Qui  saltus,  Tiberine,  tuos  sacrumque  Numici 
Litus  arant,  Rutulosque  exercent  vomere  coHes 
Circaeumque  jugum  ;  quis  Jupiter  Anxurus  arvis 
Praesidet  et  viridi  gaudens  Feronia  luco  ;  800 

Qua  Saturae  jacet  atra  pahis,  gelidusque  per  imas 
Quaerit  iter  valles  atque  in  mare  conditur*Ufens. 

Hos  super  advenit  Volsca  de  gcnto  Camilla, 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    VII.  171 

Agmen  agens  equitum  et  florentes  aere  catervas, 

Bellatrix,  non  illa  colo  calatbisve  Minervae  805 

Femineas  assueta  manuSj  sed  proelia  virgo 

Dura  pati  cursuque  pedum  praevertere  ventos. 

Illa  vel  intactae  segetis  per  summa  volaret 

Gramina,  nec  teneras  cursu  laesisset  aristas ; 

Vel  mare  per  medium,  fluctu  suspensa  tumenti,  810 

Ferret  iter,  celeres  nec  tingueret  aequore  plantas. 

Illam  omnis  tectis  agrisque  effusa  juventus 

Turbaque  miratur  matrum  et  prospectat  euntem, 

Attonitis  inhians  animis,  ut  regius  ostro 

Velet  honos  leves  humeros,  ut  fibula  crinem  815 

Auro  internectat,  Lyciam  ut  gerat  ipsa  pharetram 

Et  pastoralem  praefixa  cuspide  myrtum. 


P.  VIRGILII  MAROKIS 

AENEIDOS 

LIBER  OCTAVUS. 


Ut  belli  signum  Laurenti  Tumus  ab  arce  "■' 

Extulit,  et  rauco  strepuerunt  cornua  cantu, 

Utque  acres  concussit  equos,  utquc  impulit  arma  ; 

Extemplo  turbati  animi,  simul  omne  tumultu 

Conjurat  treiDido  Latium,  saevitque  juventus  5 

EfFera.     Ductores  primi,  Messapus  et  Ufens 

Contemtorque  deum  Mezentius,  undique  cogunt 

Auxilia,  et  latos  vastant  cultoribus  a<yros. 

Mittitur  et  magni  Ycnulus  Diomedis  ad  urbem, 

Qui  petat  auxilium,  et,  Latio  consistere  Teucros,  10 

Advectum  Aenean  classi  victosque  Penates 

Inferre,  et  iatis  rcgem  sc  dicere  posci, 

Edoceat,  multasque  viro  se  adjungere  gentes 

Dardanio,  et  late  Latio  increbrescere  nomcn. 

Quid  struat  bis  coeptis,  quem,  si  Fortuna  sequatur,       15 

Eventum  pugnae  cupiat,  manifcstius  ipsi, 

Quam  Tumo  regi  aut  regi  apparere  Latino. 

Talia  per  Latium.     Quae  Laomedontius  lieros 
Cuncta  vidcns  magno  curarum  fluctuat  aestu, 
Atque  animum  nunc  buc  celerem  nuuc  dividit  illuc,      20 
Tn  partesquo  rapit  varias,  pcrquc  omnia  versat : 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    VIII.  173 

Sicut  aquae  tremulum  labris  ubi  lumen  ahenis 
Sole  repercussum,  aut  radiantis  imagine  Lunae, 
Omnia  pervolitat  late  loca,  jamque  sub  auras 
Erigitur  summique  ferit  laquearia  tecti,  25 

Nox  erat,  et  terras  animalia  fessa  per  omnes 
Alituum  pecudumque  genus  sopor  altus  liabebat ; 
Quum  pater  in  ripa  gelidique  sub  aetheris  axe 
Aeneas,  tristi  turbatus  pectora  bello, 
Procubuit  seramque  dedit  per  membra  quietem.  30 

Huic  deus  ipse  loci  fluvio  Tiberinus  amoeno 
Populeas  inter  senior  se  attollere  frondes 
Visus-eum  tenuis  giauco  velabat  amictu 
Carbasus,  et  crines  umbrosa  tegebat  arundo-, 
Tum  sic  affari  et  curas  bis  demere  dictis :  35 

'  0  sate  gente  deum,  Trojanam  ex  hostibus  urbem 
'  Qui  revehis  nobis,  aeternaque  Pergama  sei-vas, 
'  Exspectate  solo  Laurenti  arvisque  Latinis, 
'  Hic  tibi  certa  domus,  certi,  ne  absiste,  Penates, 
'  Neu  belli  terrere  minis  :  tumor  omnis  et  irae  40 

'  Concessere  deum ; 

'  Jamque  tibi,  ne  vana  putes  haec  fingere  somnum, 
•'  Litoreis  ingens  inventa  sub  ilicibus  sus, 
'  Triginta  capitum  fetus  enixaj  jacebit, 
Alba,  solo  recubans,  albi  circum  ubera  nati.  45 

Hic  locus  urbis  erit,  requies  ea  certa  laborum : 
Ex  quo  ter  denis  urbem  redeuntibus  annis 
Ascanius  clari  condet  cognominis  Albam. 
Haud  incerta  cano.     Nunc  qua  ratione,  quod  instat, 
'  Expedias  victor,  paucis-advcrte-docebo.  50 

'  Arcades  his  oiis,  genus  a  Pallante  profectum, 
''  Qui  regem  Evandrum  comites,  qui  signa  secuti, 
'  Delegere  locum  et  posuere  in  montibus  urbem, 
'  Pallantis  proavi  de  nomine  Pallanteum  : 
'  Hi  beUum  assidue  ducunt  cum  gente  Latina :  55 


174  AENEIDOS   LID.    VIII. 

"  Hos  castri*  adhibe  socios,  et  foedera  junge. 

"  Ipse  cgo  te  ripis  et  recto  flumine  ducam, 

"  Adversum  remis  superes  subvectus  ut  amnem. 

"  Surge  age,  nate  dea,  primisque  cadentibus  astris 

"  Junoni  fer  rite  preces,  iramque  minasque  GO 

"  Supplicibus  supcra  votis.     Mihi  victor  honorem 

"Persolves.     Ego  sum,  pleno  quem  flumine  cernis 

"  Stringentem  ripas  et  pinguia  culta  secantem, 

"  Caeruleus  Thybris,  coelo  gratissimus  amnis. 

"  Hic  mihi  magna  domus,  celsis  caput  urbibus,  exit."    G5 

Dixit,  deinde  lacu  Fluvius  se  condidit  alto, 

Ima  petens ;  nox  Aenean  somnusque  reliquit. 

Surgit  et,  aetherii  spectans  orientia  solis 

Lumina,  rite  cavis  undam  de  flumine  palmis 

Sustinet,  ac  tales  effundit  ad  aethera  voces  :  70 

"  Kymphae,  Laurentes  nymphae,  genus  amnibus  uude  est, 

"  Tuque,  o  Thybri  tuo  genitor  cum  flumine  sancto, 

"  Accipite  Aenean  et  tandem  arcete  periclis  ! 

"  Quo  te  cumque  lacus  miserantem  incommoda  nostra 

"  Fonte  tenet,  quocumque  solo  pulcherrimus  exis,  75 

"  Semper  honore  meo,  semper  celebrabere  donis, 

"  Corniger  Hesperidum  fluvius  regnator  aquarum. 

"  Adsis  0  tantum,  et  propius  tua  numina  firmes  !  " 

Sic  memorat,  geminasque  legit  de  chisse  bircmes, 

Kemigioque  aptat ;  socios  simul  instruit  armis.  80 

Ecce  autem  subitum  atque  oculis  mirabile  monstrum, 

Candida  per  silvam  cum  fetu  concolor  albo 

Procubuit  viridique  in  litore  conspicitur  sus : 

Quam  pius  Aeneas  tibi  euim,  tibi,  maxima  Juno, 

Mactat,  sacra  ferens,  et  cum  grege  sistit  ad  aram.  85 

Thybris  ea  fluvium,  quam  longa  est,  nocte  tumentem 

Leniit,  et  tacita"  refliiens  ita  substitit  unda, 

Mitis  ut  in  morem  stagni  phicidaeque  paludis 

Sterneret  acquor  aquis,  remo  ut  hictamen  abcsset.   \ 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    VIII.  175 

Ergo  iter  inceptum  celerant  rumore  secundo  ;  90 

Labitur  uncta  vadis  abies,  mirantur  et  nndae, 
Miratur  nemus  insiietum  fulgentia  longe 
Scuta  virum  fiuvio,  pictasque  innare  carinas. 
Oili  remigio  noctemque  diemque  fatigant, 
Et  longos  superant  flexus,  variisque  teguntur  9n 

Arboribus,  viridesque  secant  placido  aequore  silvas, 
Sol  medium  coeli  conscenderat  igneus  orbem, 
Qimm  muros  arcenique  procul  ac  rara  domorum 
Tecta  vident,  qua3  nunc  Romana  potentia  coelo 
Aequavit,  tunc  res  inopes  Evandrus  habebat.  100 

Ocius  advertunt  proras,  urbique  propiuquant. 

Forte  die  solemnem  illo  res  Arcas  lionorem 
Ampbitryoniadae  magno  divisqu-e  ferebat 
Ante  urbem  in  luco.     Pallas  huic  filius  una, 
Una  o^nes  juvenum  primi  pauperque  senatus  105 

Tura  dabant,  tepidusque  cruor  fumabat  ad  arais. 
Ut  celsas  videre  rates,  atque  inter  opacum 
AUabi  nemus  et  tacitis  incumbere  remis ; 
Terrentur  visu  subito,  cunctique  relictis 
Consurgunt  mensis.     Audax  quos  rumpere  Pallas         110 
Sacra  vetat,  raptoque  volat  telo  obvius  ipse, 
Et  procul  e  tumulo  "  Juvenes,  quae  causa  subegit 
"  Ignotas  tentare  vias  ?     Quo  tenditis  ?  "  inquit. 
"  Qui  genus  ?  Unde  domo  ?  Pacemne  huc  fertis,  an  arma .?" 
Tum  pater  Aeneas  puppi  sic  fatur  ab  alta,  115 

Paciferaeque  manu  ramum  praetendit  olivae  : 
"  Trojugenas  ac  tela  vides  inimica  Latinis, 
"  Quos  illi  bello  profugos  egere  superbo. 
"  Evandrum  petimus.     Eerte  haec  et  dicite,  lectos 
"  Dardaniae  venisse  duees,  socia  arma  rogantes."  120 

Obstupuit  tanto  percussus  nomine  Pallas  ; 
"Egredere  o  quicumque  cs"  ait  "  coramque  parentem 
"  Alloquere,  ac  nostris  succede  penatibus  hospes !  " 


176  AENEIDOS    LIB.    VIII. 

Excepitque  manu,  dextramque  amplexus  inhaesit. 

Progressi  subeunt  luco,  fiuviumque  relinquunt.  125 

Tum  regcm  Aeneas  dictis  affatur  amicis : 

"  Optime  Grajugenum,  cui  me  fortuna  prccari 

"  Et  vitta  comtos  voluit  praetendere  ramos, 

"  Non  equidem  extimui,  Danaiim  quod  ductor  et  Arcas, 

"  Quodque  ab  stirjDe  fores  geminis  conjunctus  Atridis ;  130 

"  Sed  mea  me  virtus  et  sancta  oracula  divum, 

"  Cognatique  patres,  tua  terris  didita  iama, 

"  Conjunxere  tibi,  et  fatis  egere  volentem. 

"  Dardanus,  Iliacae  primus  pater  urbis  et  auctor, 

"  Electra,  ut  Graii  perliibent,  Atlantide  cretus,  135 

'■'  Advebitur  Teucros  ;  Electram  maximus  Atlas 

"  Edidit,  aetberios  humero  qui  sustinet  orbes. 

"  Vobis  Mercurius  pater  est,  quem  candida  Maia 

"  Cyllenae  gelido  conceptum  vertice  fudit  ; 

"  At  Maiam,  auditis  si  quidquam  credimus,  Atlas,       140 

"  Idem  Atlas  generat,  coeli  qui  sidera,  toUit. 

"  Sic  genus  amborum  scindit  se  sanguine  ab  uno. 

"  His  fretus,  non  legatos  neque  prima  per  artem 

"  Tentamenta  tui  pepigi ;  me,  me  ipse  meumque 

"  Objeci  caput,  et  su]3plex  ad  limina  veni.  145 

"  Gens  eadem,  quae  te,  crudeli  Daunia  bello 

"  Insequitur :  nos  si  pellant,  nibil  afore  credunt, 

"  Quin  omnem  Hesperiam  penitus  sua  sub  juga  mitlant, 

"  Et  mare,  quod  supra,  teneant,  quodque  alluit  infra. 

"  Accipe,  daque  fidem.     Sunt  nobis  fortia  bello  150 

"  Pectora,  sunt  animi  ct  rebus  spectata  juventus.'* 

Dixerat  Aeneas.     Ille  os  oculosque  loquentis 

Jam  dudum  et  totum  lustrabat  lumine  corpus ; 

Tum  sic  pauca  refert :  "'  Ut  te,  fortissime  Teucrum, 

"  Accipio  agnoscoque  libens  !  ut  verba  parentis  155 

"  Et  vocem  Ancbisae  magni  vultumque  recordor ! 

"  Nam  memini  Hcsionac  visentcm  rcffna  sororis 


AENEIDOS    LIB.     VIII,  IVV 

"  Laomedontiaden  Priamiim,  Salamina  petentem, 

"  Protenus  Arcadiae  gelidos  invisere  fines. 

"  Tum  mibi  prima  genas  vestibat  flore  juventas,  160 

"  Mirabarque  duces  Teucros,  mirabar  et  ipsum 

"  Laomedontiaden  ;  sed  cunctis  altior  ibat 

"  Ancbises.     Mibi  mens  juvenali  ardebat  amore 

"  Compellare  virum,  et.dextrae  conjungere  dextram. 

"  Accessi,  et  cupidus  Pbenei  sub  moenia  duxi.  165 

"  Ille  mibi  insignem  pbaretram  Lyciasque  sagittas 

"  Discedens  cblamydemque  auro  dedit  intertextam, 

"  Frenaque  bina,  meus  quae  nunc  babet,  aurea,  Pallas. 

"  Ergo  et,  quam  petitis,  juncta  est  mibi  foedere  dextra, 

"  Et,  lux  quum  primum  terris  se  crastina  reddet,         170 

"  Auxilio  laetos  dimittam,  opibusque  juvabo. 

"  Interea  sacra  baec,  quando  buc  venistis  amici, 

"  Annua,  quae  differre  nefas,  celebrate  faventes 

"  Nobiscum,  et  jam  nunc  sociorum  assuescite  mensis." 

Haec  ubi  dicta,  dapes  jubet  et  sublata  reponi  1V5 

Pocula,  gramineoque  viros  locat  ipse  sediH, 

Praecipuumque  toro  et  villosi  pelle  leonis 

Accipit  Aenean  solioque  invitat  acerno. 

Tum  lecti  juvenes  certatim  araeque  sacerdos 

Yiscera  tosta  ferunt  taurorum,  onerantque  canistris     180 

Dona  laboratae  Cereris,  Baccbumque  ministrant. 

Vescitur  Aeneas,  simul  et  Trojana  juventus, 

Perpetui  tergo  bovis  et  lustralibus  extis.    ^^ 

Postquam  exemta  fames  et  amor  compressus  edendi, 
Rex  Evandrus  ait :  ^'  Non  baec  solcmnia  nobis,  185 

"  Has  ex  more  dapes,  banc  tanti  numinis  aram 
"  Yana  superstitio  veterumque  ignara  deorum 
"  Imposuit ;  saevis,  bospes  Trojane,  periclis 
"  Servati  facimus,  meritosque  novamus  bonores. 
"  Jam  primum  saxis  suspensam  banc  adspice  rupem  :  190 
"  Disjectae  procul  ut  molcs,  desertaquc  montis 
8* 


178  AENEIDOS    LIB.    VIII. 

''  Stat  domus,  ct  scopuli  ingentcm  traxere  ruinam. 

'•'  Hic  spelunca  fuit,  vasto  submota  rccessu, 

"  Semihominis  Caci  facies  quam  dira  tenebat, 

"  Solis  inacccssam  radiis  :  semperque  recenti  195 

"  Caede  tepebat  liumus,  foribusque  affixa  superbis 

"  Ora  virum  tristi  pendebant  pallida  tabo. 

"  Huic  monstro  Vulcanus  erat  pater :  illius  atros 

*'  Ore  vomens  ignes,  magna  se  mole  ferebat. 

"  Attulit  et  nobis  aliquando  optantibus  aetas  200 

"  Auxilium  adventumque  dei.     Nam  maximus  ultor, 

"  Tergemini  nece  Greryonae  spoliisque  superbus, 

"  Alcides  aderat,  taurosque  hac  victor  agebat 

"  Ingentes ;  vallemque  boves  amnemque  tenebant. 

"  At  furiis  Caci  mens  effera,  ne  quid  inausum  205 

"  Aut  intractatum  scelerisve  dolive  fuisset, 

"  Quatuor  a  stabulis  praestanti  corpore  tauros 

"  Avertit,  totidem  forma  superante  juvencas. 

"  Atque  hos,  ne  qua  forent  pedibus  vestigia  rectis, 

"  Cauda  in  speluncam  tractos  versisque  viarum  210 

"  Indiciis  raptos,  saxo  occultabat  opaco. 

"  Quaerenti  nulJa  ad  speluncam  signa  ferebant. 

"  Interea,  quum  jam  stabulis  saturata  moveret 

"  Amphitryoniades  armenta  abitumque  pararet, 

"  Discessu  mugire  boves,  atque  omne  querelis  215 

"  Impleri  nemus,  et  collcs  clamore  relinqui. 

"  Ecddidit  una  boum  vocem,  vastoque  sub  antro 

"  Mugiit,  et  Caci  spem  custodita  fefellit. 

"  Hic  vero  Alcidae  fariis  exarserat  atro 

"  Felle  dolor :  rapit  arma  manu  nodisque  gravatum     220 

"  Kobur,  et  aerii  cursu  petit  ardua  montis. 

"  Tum  primum  nostri  Cacum  videre  timentem 

"  Turbatumquc  oculis.     Fugit  ilicct  ocior  Euro, 

"  Spehmcamque  polit :  j)edibus  timor  addidit  alas. 

"  Ut  sese  inchisit,  ruptiRque  immane  catenis  225 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    VIII.  179 

"  Dejecit  saxum,  ferro  qiiod  et  arte  jDaterna 

"  Pendeljat,  fultosque  emuniit  objice  postcs ; 

"  Ecce  furens  animis  aderat  Tirynthius,  omnemque 

"  Accessum  lustrans  huc  ora  ferebat  et  ilhic, 

"  Dentihus  infrendens.     Ter  totum  fervidus  ira  230 

"  Lustrat  Aventini  montem,  ter  saxea  tentat 

"  Ijimina  nequidquam,  ter  fessus  valle  resedit. 

"  Stahat  acuta  silex,  praecisis  undique  saxis 

"  Speluncae  dorso  insurgens,  altissima  visu, 

"  Dirarum  nidis  domus  opportuna  volucrum':  235 

"  Hanc,  ut  prona  jugo  laevum  incumhehat  ad  amnem, 

"  Dexter  in  adversum  nitens  concussit,  et  imis 

"  Avulsam  solvit  radicihus,  inde  repente 

"  Impulit ;  impulsu  quo  maximus  intonat  aether, 

"  Dissultant  rijjae  refluitque  exterritus  amnis.  240 

'•'  At  specus  et  Caci  detecta  apparuit  ingeus 

"  Kegia,  et  umhrosae  penitus  patuere  cavernae, 

"  Non  secus,  ac  si  qua  penitus  vi  terra  dehiscens 

"  Infernas  reseret  sedes  et  regna  rechidat 

"  Pallida,  dis  invisa,  superque  immane  barathrum        245 

"  Cernatur,  trepidentque  immisso  himine  Manes. 

"  Ergo  insperata  deprensum  in  kice  repente, 

"  Inclusumque  cavo  saxo  atque  insueta  rudentem, 

"  Desuper  Alcides  telis  premit,  omniaque  arma 

"  Advocat,  et  ramis  vastisque  molarihus  instat.  250 

"  Ille  autem-neque  enim  fuga  jam  super  ulla  pericli 

"  Faucihus  ingentem  fumum-mirahile  dictu- 

"  Evomit,  involvitque  domum  caligine  caeca, 

'"'  Prospectum  eripiens  ociilis,  glomeratque  suh  antro 

"  Fumiferam  noctem  commixtis  igne  tenehris.  255 

**'  Non  tuht  Alcides  animis,  seque  ipse  per  ignem 

"  Praecipiti  jecit  saltu,  qua  phirimus  undam 

"  Fumus  agit  nehulaque  ingens  specus  aestuat  atra. 

*  Hic  Oacum  in  tenehris  incendia  vana  vomentem 


180  AENEIDOS   LIB.    VIII. 

"  Corripit,  in  nodum  complexus,  et  angit  inliaerens      260 

"  Elisos  oculos  et  siccum  sanguine  guttur. 

''  Panditur  extemplo  foribus  domus  atra  revulsis, 

"  Abstractaeque  boves  abjurataeque  rapinae 

"  Coelo  ostenduntur,  pedibusque  informe  cadaver 

"  Protrahitur.     Nequeunt  expleri  corda  tuendo  265 

"  Terribiles  oculos,  vultum  villosaque  setis 

"  Pectora  semiferi,  atque  exstinctos  faucibus  ignes. 

"  Ex  illo  celebratus  honos,  laetique  minores 

"  Servavere  diem  ;  primusque  Potitius  auctor, 

"  Et  domus  Herculei  custos  Pinaria  sacri  270 

"  Hanc  aram  luco  statuit,  quae  Maxima  semper 

"  Dicetur  nobis,  et  erit  quae  maxima  semper. 

"  Quare  agite,  o  juvenes,  tantarum  in  munere  laudum 

"  Cingite  fronde  comas  et  pocula  porgite  dextris, 

"  Communemque  vocate  deum,  et  date  vina  volentes."  275 

Dixerat,  Herculea  bicolor  quum  popuhis  umbra 

Vcla\dtque  comas  foKisque  innexa  pependit, 

Et  sacer  imj)levit  dextram  scyphus.     Ocius  omnes 

In  mensam  laeti  libant,  divosque  precantur. 

Devexo  interea  propior  fit  Vesper  Olympo,  280 

Jamque  sacerdotes  primusque  Potitius  ibant, 
Pellibus  in  morem  cincti,  flammasque  ferebant. 
Instaurant  epulas,  et  mensae  grata  secundae 
Doua  ferunt,  cumulantque  oneratis  lancibus  aras. 
Tum  Salii  ad  cantus  incensa  altaria  circum  285 

Populeis  adsunt  evincti  tempora  ramis, 
Hic  juvenum  chorus,  illc  senum  :  qui  carmine  laudes 
Herculeas  et  flicta  ferunt :  ut  prima  novercac 
Monstra  manu  geminosque  premens  ehserit  angues ; 
Ut  bcllo  egrcgias  idem  disjecerit  urbes,  290 

Trcjamque  Oechaliamquo,  et  duros  mille  labores 
Kege  sub  Eurystheo  fatis  Junonis  iniquae 
Pertulerit.     Tu  nubigcnas,  invicto,  bimerabres, 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    VIII.  181 

Hylaeumque  Pholumque,  manu,  tu  Cresia  mactas 
Prodigia  et  vastum  Nemea  sub  rupe  leonem,  295 

Te  Stygii  tremuere  lacus,  te  janitor  Orci 
Ossa  super  recubans  antro  semiesa  cruento. 
Nec  te  uUae  facies,  non  terruit  ipse  Typhoeus, 
Arduus  arma  tenens,  non  te  rationis  egentem 
Lernaeus  turba  capitum  circumstetit  anguis,  300 

Salve,  vera  Jovis  proles,  decus  addite  divis, 
Et  nos  et  tua  dexter  adi  pede  sacra  secundo. 
Talia  carminibus  celebrant ;  super  omnia  Caci 
Speluncam  adjiciunt  spirantemque  ignibus  ipsum. 
Consonat  omne  nemus  strepitu,  collesque  resultant.      305 

Exin  se  cuncti  divinis  rebus  ad  urbem 
Perfectis  referunt.     Ibat  rex  obsitus  aevo, 
Et  comitem  Aenean  juxta  natumque  tenebat 
Ingrediens,  varioque  viam  sermone  levabat. 
Miratur  facilesque  oculos  fert  omnia  circum  310 

Aeneas,  capiturque  locis,  et  singula  laetus 
Exquiritque  auditque  virum  monumenta  priorum. 
Tum  rex  Evandrus,  Eomanae  conditor  arcis : 
"  Haec  nemora  indigcnae  Fauni  uympbaeque  tenebant, 
"  Gensque  virum  truncis  et  duro  robore  nata,  315 

"  Quis  neque  mos  neque  cultus  erat,  nec  jungere  tauros 
"  Aut  componere  opes  norant,  aut  parcere  parto  ; 
"  Sed  rami  atque  asper  victu  venatus  alebat. 
"  Primus  ab  aetherio  venit  Saturnus  Olympo, 
"  Arma  Jovis  fugiens  et  regnis  exsul  ademtis  :  320 

"  Is  genus  indocile  ac  dispersum  montibus  altis 
"  Composuit,  legesque  dedit,  Latiumque  vocari 
"  Maluit,  his  quoniam  latuissct  tutus  in  oris. 
*'  Aurea  quae  perhibent,  illo  sub  rege  fuere 
"  Saecula  :  sic  placida  populos  in  pace  regebat,  325 

"  Deterior  donec  paullatim  ac  decolor  aetas 
"  Et  belli  rabies  et  aravn-  successit  habendi 


182  AENEIDOS   LIB.    VIII. 

''  Tiim  manus  Ausonia  efc  gcntcs  venere  Sicanac, 

"  Saepius  ct  nomen  posuit  Saturnia  tellus  ; 

"  Tum  reges,  aspcrque  immani  corpore  Thybris,  330 

"  A  quo  post  Itali  fiuvium  cognomine  Thybrim 

"  Diximus :  amisit  verum  vetus  Albula  nomen. 

"  Me  pulsum  patria  pelagique  extrema  scquentem 

"  Fortuna  omnipotcns  cfc  incluctabile  fatum 

"  His  posucre  locis,  matrisque  egcre  tremcnda  335 

"  Carmentis  nymphae  monita  et  deus  auctor  Apollo."" 

Vix  ea  dicta ;  dchinc  progressus,  monstrat  et  aram, 

Et  Carmentalem  Eomani  nominc  portam  . 

Quam  memorant,  nymphae  priscum  Carmentis  honorem, 

Vatis  fatidicae,  cecinit  quae  prima  futuros  340 

Aeneadas  magnos  et  nobile  Pallanteum. 

Hinc  lucum  ingentcm,  quem  Romulus  accr  Asylum 

Retulit,  et  gehda  monstrat  sub  rupe  Lupercal, 

Parrhasio  dictum  Panos  de  more  Lycaei  ; 

Nec  non  et  sacri  monstrat  ncmus  Argileti,  345 

Testaturquc  locum  et  letum  docet  hospitis  Argi. 

Ilinc  ad  Tarpeiam  sedem  et  Capitolia  ducit, 

Aurea  nunc,  olim  silvestribus  horrida  dumis. 

Jam  tum  religio  pavidos  tcrrebat  agrestes 

Dira  loci ;  jam  tum  silvam  saxumque  tremebant,         350 

"  Hoc  nemus,  hunc  "  inquit  "  frondoso  vertice  coHem, 

"  Quis  dcus,  incertum  est,  habitat  deus.     Arcadcs  ipsum 

"  Crcdunt  se  vidisse  Jovem,  quum  saepe  nigrantem 

"  Aegida  concuteret  dextra,  nimbosque  cieret. 

"  Hacc  duo  practcrca  disjectis  oppida  muris,  355 

"  Reliquias  veterumque  vidcs  monumenta  virorum : 

"  Hanc  Janus  pater,  hanc  Saturnus  condidit  arcem ; 

"  Janiculum  huic,  illi  fuerat  Saturnia  nomen." 

Talibus  inter  se  dictis  ad  tccta  subibant 

Paupcris  Evandri,  passimque  armenta  videbant  360 

Romanoque  Foro  ct  laulis  imigiro  (\'iiiiiip, 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    VIII.  183 

llt  ventLim  ud  sedes  :  "  Haec  "  inqiiit  "  limina  victor 

^'  Alcides  subiit,  hacc  illum  regia  cepit : 

"  Aude,  hospes,  contemnere  opes,  et  tc  quoque  dignum 

"  Finge  deo,  rebusque  veni  non  asper  egenis."  365 

Dixit,  et  angusti  subter  fastigia  tecti 

Ingentem  Aenean  duxit,  stratisque  locavit 

EfFultum  foliis  et  pelle  Libystidis  ursae. 

Nox  ruit  et  ftiscis  tellurem  amplectitur  alis. 
At  Yenus  haud  animo  nequidquam  exterrita  mater,     370 
Laurentumque  minis  et  duro  mota  tumultu, 
Vulcanum  alloquitur,  thalamoque  haec  conjugis  aureo 
Incipit,  et  dictis  divinum  adspirat  amorem : 
"  Dum  bcllo  Argolici  vastabant  Pergama  reges 
"  Debita  casurasque  inimicis  ignibus  arces,  375 

''  Nou  ullum  auxihum  miseris,  non  arma  rosavi 
"  Artis  opisque  tuae,  nec  te,  carissime  conjux, 
"  Incassumve  tuos  volui  exercere  labores  ; 
"  Quamvis  et  Priami  deberem  plurima  natis, 
"  Et  durum  Aeneae  fievissem  saepe  laborem.  380 

"  Nunc  Jovis  imperiis  Kutulorum  constitit  oris  : 
"  Ergo  eadem  supplex  venio,  et  sanctum  mihi  numen 
"  Arma  rogo,  genetrix  nato.     Te  fiha  Nerei, 
"  Te  potuit  lacrimis  Tithonia  flectere  conjux. 
"  Adspice,  qui  coeant  populi,  quae  moenia  chiusis        385 
"  Eerrum  acuant  portis  in  me  excidiumque  meorum." 
Dixerat,  et  niveis  hinc  atque  hinc  diva  lacertis 
Cunctantem  amplexu  molH  fovet.     Ille  repente 
Acce]3it  solitam  flammam,  notusque  medullas 
Intravit  calor  et  kbefacta  per  ossa  cucurrit,  390 

Non  secus  atque  ohm,  tonitru  quum  rupta  corusco 
Ignea  rima  mioans  percurrit  himine  nimbos. 
Soiisit  laeta  dolis  et  formae  conscia  conjux. 
Tum  pater  acterno  fatur  devinctus  amore  : 
"  Quid  ca-isas  petis  ex  alto  ?  fiducia  cessit  395 


184  AENEIDOS    LIB.    VIII, 

"  Quo  tibi,  diva,  mei  ?     Similis  si  cura  fuisset ; 

"  Tum  quoque  fas  nobis  Teucros  armarc  foisset : 

"  Nec  pater  omuipotens  Trojam  nec  fata  vetabant 

"  Stare,  decemque  alios  Priamum  superesse  per  annos. 

"  Et  nunc,  si  bellare  paras  atque  haec  tibi  mens  est,    400 

"  Quidquid  in  arte  mea  possum  promittere  curae, 

"  Quod  fieri  ferro  liquidove  potest  electro, 

"  Quantum  ignes  animaeque  valent,  absiste  precaudo 

"  Viiibus  indubitare  tuis."     Ea  verba  locutus 

Oi^tatos  dedit  amplexus,  placidumque  petivit  405 

Conjugis  infusus  gremio  per  membra  soporem. 

Inde  ubi  prima  quies  medio  jam  noctis  abactae 

Curriculo  expulerat  somnum,  quum  femina  primum, 

Cui  tolerare  colo  vitam  tenuique  Minerva^ 

Impositum,  cinerem  et  sopitos  suscitat  ignes,  410 

Noctem  addens  operi,  famulasque  ad  lumina  longo 

Exercet  penso,  castum  ut  servare  cubile 

Conjugis  et  possit  parvos  educere  natos : 

Haud  secus  Ignipotens  nec  tempore  segnior  illo 

Mollibus  e  stratis  opera  ad  fabrilia  surgit.  415 

Insula  Sicanium  juxta  latus  Aeoliamque 

Erigitur  Liparcn,  fumantibus  ardua  saxis, 

Quam  subter  specus  et  Cyclopum  exesa  caminis 

Antra  Aetnaea  tonant,  validique  incudibus  ictus 

Auditi  referunt  gemitum,  striduntque  cavernis  420 

Stricturae  Chalybum,  et  fornacibus  ignis  anhelat ;     • 

Vulcani  domus  et  Vulcania  nomine  tcUus. 

Hoc  tunc  Ignipotens  coelo  desccndit  ab  alto. 

Ferrum  exercebant  vasto  Cyclopes  in  antro, 

Brontesque  Steropesque  et  nudus  membra  Pyracmon.  425 

His  informatum  manibus  jain  parte  polita 

Fulmcn  erat ;  toto  gcnitor  quae  plurima  coelo 

Dejicit  in  terras ;  pars  imperfecta  manebat : 

Tres  imbris  torti  radios,  tros  nubis  aquosae 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    VIII  185 

Addiderant,  rutili  tres  ignis  et  alitis  Aiistri ;  430 

Fulgores  nunc  terrificos  sonitumq[ue  metumque 

Miscebant  operi,  fiammisque  sequacibus  iras. 

Parte  alia  Marti  currumque  rotasque  volucres 

Instabant,  quibus  ille  viros,  quibus  excitat  urbes  ; 

Aegidaque  liorriferam,  turbatae  Palladis  arma,  435 

Certatim  squamis  serpentum  auroque  j^olibant, 

Connexosque  angues,  ipsamque  in  pectore  divae 

Gorgona,  desecto  vertentem  lumina  collo. 

"  Tollite  cuncta  "  inquit  "  coeptosque  auferte  labores, 

"  Aetnaei  Cyclopes,  et  buc  advertite  mentem.  440 

"  Arma  acri  facienda  viro.     Nunc  viribus  usus, 

"  Nunc  manibus  rapidis,  omni  nunc  arte  magistra. 

"  Praecipitate  moras  !  "     Nec  plura  efFatus,  at  illi 

Ocius  incubuere  omnes,  pariterque  laborem 

Sortiti.     Fluit  aes  rivis  aurique  metallum,  445 

Vulnificusque  cbalybs  vasta  fornace  liquescit. 

Ingentem  clipeum  informant,  unum  omnia  contra 

Tela  Latinorum,  septenosque  orbibus  orbes 

Impediunt.     Alii  ventosis  follibus  auras 

Accipiunt  redduntque  ;  alii  stridentia  tinguunt  450 

Aera  lacu ;  gemit  impositis  incudibus  antrum. 

Illi  inter  sese  multa  vi  bracbia  toUunt 

In  numerum,  versantque  tenaci  forcipe  massam. 

Haec  pater  Aeoliis  properat  dum  Lemnius  oris, 
Evandrum  ex  humili  tecto  lux  suscitat  alma  455 

Et  matutini  volucrum  sub  culmine  cantus. 
Consurgit  senior,  tunicaque  inducitur  artus, 
Et  Tyrrhena  pedum  circumdat  vincula  plantis ; 
Tum  lateri  atque  liumeris  Tegeaeum  subligat  ensem, 
Demissa  ab  laeva  pantlierae  terga  retorquens.  460 

Nec  non  et  gemini  custodes  limine  ab  alto 
Praeceduni  gressumque  canes  comitantur  berilem. 
Hospitis  Aeneae  sedem  et  secreta  petebat. 


186  AENEIDOS    LIB.    VIII. 

Sermonum  memor  et  promissi  muneris,  heros. 

Nec  minus  Aeneas  se  matutinus  agebat.  465 

Filius  huic  Pallas,  illi  comes  ibat  Achates. 

Congressi  jungunt  dextras,  mediisque  residunt 

Aedibus,  ct  licito  taudem  sermone  fruuntur. 

Rex  prior  haec  : 

"  Maxime  Teucrorum  ductor,  quo  sospltc  numquam    470 

"  Ees  equidem  Trojae  victas  aut  rcgna  fatebor, 

"  Nobis  ad  beUi  auxiliiim  pro  nomine  tanto 

"  Exiguae  vires  :  hinc  Tusco  claudimur  amni, 

"  Hinc  Rutulus  premit  et  murum  circumsonat  armis. 

"  Scd  tibi  ego  ingentes  populos  opulentaque  regnis       475 

'■  Jungere  castra  paro  :  quam  fors  inopina  salutem 

"  Ostentat.     Fatis  huc  te  poscentibus  affers. 

"  Haud  procul  hinc  saxo  incoHtur  fundata  vetusto 

"  Urbis  AgylHnae  sedes,  ubi  Lydia  quondam 

"  Gens,  bcllo  j)racclara,  jugis  insedit  Etruscis.  480 

"  Hanc  multos  florentem  annos  rex  deinde  superbo 

"  Imperio  et  saevis  tenuit  Mezentius  armis. 

"  Quid  memorem  infandas  caedcs  ?  quid  facta  tyranni 

"  Effera  ?     Di  capiti  ipsius  gcnerique  reservent ! 

"  Mortua  quin  etiam  jungebat  corpora  vivis,  485 

"  Componens  manibusque  manus  atque  oribus  ora- 

"  Tormenti  genus-,  et  sanie  taboque  flucntes 

"  Complexu  in  misero  longa  sic  morte  necabat. 

"  At  fessi  tandem  cives  inflmda  furentem 

"  Armati  circumsistunt  ipsumque  domumque,  490 

"  Obtruncant  socios,  ignem  ad  fastigia  jactant. 

"  Ille   inter  caedem  Eutulorum  ehipsus  in  agros 

*'  Confugere,  et  Turni  defendier  hospitis  armis. 

"Ergo  omnis  furiis  surrcxit  Etruria  justis : 

"  Eegem  ad  supplicium  praesenti  Marte  rcposcunt.      495 

"  His  ego  te,  Acnea,  ductorem  millibus  addam. 

"  Toto  namquo  fremunt  condensac  litoro  puppcs, 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    VIII.  187 

''  Signaque  ferre  jubent ;  retinet  longaevus  liaruspex, 

"  Fata  canens:  '  0  Maeoniae  delecta  juventus, 

"  '  rios  veterum  virtusque  viriim,  quos  justus  in  bostem  500 

"  '  Fert  dolor  et  merita  accendit  Mezentius  ira, 

"  '  Nulli  fas  Italo  tantam  subjungere  gentem  : 

"  '  Externos  optate  duces.'     Tum  Etrusca  resedit 

"  Hoc  acies  campo,  monitis  exterrita  divum. 

"  Ipse  oratores  ad  me  regnique  coronam  505 

"  Cum  sceptro  misit,  mandatque  insignia  Tarcbon, 

"  Succedam  castris,  Tyrrbenaque  regna  capessam. 

"  Sed  mibi  tarda  gelu  saeclisque  effeta  senectus 

"  Invidet  imperium,  seraeque  ad  fortia  vires. 

''  Gnatum  exbortarer,  ni  mixtus  matre  Sabella  510 

"  Hinc  partem  patriae  traberet.     Tu,  cujus  et  annis 

"  Et  generi  fata  indulgent,  quem  numina  poscunt, 

"  Ingredere,  o  Teucrum  atque  Italum  fortissime  ductor, 

"  Hunc  tibi  praeterea,  spes  et  solatia  nostri, 

"  Pallanta  adjungam  :  sub  te  tolerare  magistro  515 

"  MiHtiam  et  grave  Martis  opus,  tua  cernere  facta 

"  Assuescat,  primis  et  te  miretur  ab  annis. 

"  Arcadas  buic  equites  bis  centuin,  robora  jjubis 

"  Lecta,  dabo,  totidemque  suo  tibi  nomine  Pallas.'' 

Vix  ea  fatus  erat :  defixique  ora  tenebant  520 

Aeneas  Ancbisiades  et  fidus  Acbates ; 

Multaque  dura  suo  tristi  cum  corde  putabant, 

Ni  signum  coelo  Cytberea  dedisset  aperto. 

Namque  improviso  vibratus  ab  aetbere  fulgor 

Cum  sonitu  venit,  et  ruere  omnia  visa  re]3ente,  525 

Tyrrbenusque  tubae  mugire  per  actbera  clangor. 

Suspiciunt ;  iterum  atque  iterum  fragor  increpat  ingens. 

Arma  inter  nubem  coeli  in  regione  serena 

Per  sudum  rutilare  vident  et  pulsa  tonare. 

Obstupuere  animis  alii ;  sed  Troius  beros  530 

Agnovit  sonitum  et  divae  promissa  parentis. 


188  AENEIDOS    LIB.    VIII. 

Tum  memorat :  "  Ne  vero,  bospes,  ne  quaere  profecto, 

"  Quem  casum  portcnta  ferant :  ego  poscor  Olympo. 

"  Hoc  signum  cecinit  missuram  diva  creatrix, 

"  Si  bellum  ingrucret.  Vulcaniaquc  arma  per  auras     535 

"  Laturam  auxilio. 

•'  Heu  quantae  miseris  caedes  Laurentibus  instant ! 

"  Quas  poenas  mihi,  Turne,  dabis  !  quam  multa  sub  undas 

"  Scuta  virum  galeasque  et  fortia  corpora  volves, 

"  Thybri  pater  !  Poscant  acies  et  foedera  rumpant !  "  540 

Haec  ubi  dicta  dedit,  solio  se  tollit  ab  alto, 

Et  primum  Herculeis  sopitas  ignibus  aras 

Suscitat,  hesternumque  Larem  parvosque  Penates 

Laetus  adit ;  mactant  lectas  de  more  bidentes 

Evandrus  pariter,  pariter  Trojana  juventus.  545 

Post  hinc  ad  naves  graditur,  sociosque  revisit. 

Quorum  de  numero,  qui  sese  in  bella  sequantur, 

Praestantcs  virtute  legit ;  pars  cetera  prona 

Fertur  aqua,  segnisque  secundo  defiuit  amni, 

Nuntia  ventura  Ascanio  rerumque  patrisque.  550 

Dantur  equi  Teucris  Tyrrhena  petentibus  arva  ; 

Ducunt  exsortcm  Aencae,  quem  fulva  leonis 

Pellis  obit  totum,  praefulgens  unguibus  aureis. 

Fama  volat  parvam  subito  vulgata  per  urbem, 
Ocius  ire  equites  Tyrrheni  ad  litora  regis ;  555 

Vota  mctu  duplicant  matres,  propiusque  periclo 
It  timor,  et  major  Martis  jam  apparet  imago. 
Tum  pater  Evandrus,  dextram  complexus  euntis, 
Haeret,  inexpletus  lacrimans,  ac  talia  fatur : 
"  0  mihi  praeteritos  referat  si  Jupiter  annos,  560 

"  Qualis  eram,  quum  primam  aciem  Praeneste  sub  ipsa 
"  Stravi  scutorumque  incendi  victor  acervos, 
"  Et  rcgem  hac  Herilum  dextra  sub  Tartara  misi-, 
"  Nascenti  cui  trcs  animas  Feronia  mater 
• '  (Horrendum  dictu  !)  dederat,  terna  arma  movenda ;  565 


AENEIDOS    LIB,    VIII.  189 

^'  Ter  leto  sternendus  erat ;  cui  tunc  tamen  omnes 

"  Abstulit  haec  animas  dextra  et  totidem  exuit  armis-: 

"  Non  ego  nunc  dulci  amplexu  divellerer  usquam, 

"  Nate,  tuo,  neque  finitimo  Mezentius  umquam 

"  Huic  capiti  insultans,  tot  ferro  saeva  dedissct  570 

"  Funera,  tam  multis  viduasset  civibus  urbem. 

"  At  vos,  0  superi,  et  divum  tu  maxime  rector 

"  Jupiter,  Arcadii  quaeso  miserescite  regis, 

"  Et  patrias  audite  preces  :  Si  numina  vestra 

"  Incolumem  Pallanta  mibi,  si  fata  reservant,  575 

"  Si  visurus  eum  vivo  et  venturus  in  unum  : 

"  Vitam  oro,  patior  quemvis  durare  laborem  ; 

"  Sin  aliquem  infandum  casum,  Fortuna,  minaris  : 

"  Nunc,  nunc  o  liceat  crudelem  abrumpere  vitam,    ■ 

"  Dum  curae  ambiguac,  dum  spes  incerta  futuri,  580 

"  Dum  te,  care  puer,  mea  sola  et  sera  voluptas, 

'*  Complexus  teneo  ;  gravior  neu  nuntius  aures 

"  Vulneret."     Haec  genitor  digressu  dicta  supremo 

Fundebat ;  famuli  coUapsum  in  tecta  ferebant. 

Jamque  adeo  exierat  portis  equitatus  apertis,  585 

Aeneas  inter  primos  et  fidus  Achates, 

Inde  alii  Trojae  proceres ;  ipse  agmine  Pallas 

In  medio,  chlamyde  et  pictis  conspectus  in  armis  : 

Qualis  ubi  Oceani  perfusus  Lucifer  unda, 

Quem  Venus  ante  alios  astrorum  diligit  ignes,  590 

Extulit  os  sacrum  coelo  tenebrasque  resolvit. 

Stant  pavidae  in  muris  matrcs,  oculisque  seq[uuntur 

Pulveream  nubem  et  fulgentes  aere  catervas. 

OUi  per  dumos,  qua  proxima  meta  viarum, 

Armati  tendunt ;  it  clamor,"et  agmine  facto  595 

Quadrupedante  putrem  sonitu  quatit  ungula  campum. 

Est  ingens  gelidum  hicus  prope  Caeritis  amnem, 

Religione  patrum  late  sacer ;  undique  coUes 

rnckisere  cavi  et  nifirra  nemus  abiete  cingunt. 


190  AENEIDOS   LIB.    VIIl. 

Silvano  fama  est  vetcrcs  sacrasse  Pclasgos,  600 

Arvorum  pecorisque  dco,  lucumquc  diemque^ 

Qui  primi  lines  aliquando  habuerc  Latinos. 

Haud  procul  liinc  Tarcbo  ct  Tyrrlieni  tuta  tencbant 

Castra  locis,  celsoque  omnis  de  colle  videri 

Jam  poterat  legio,  ct  latis  tendebat  in  arvis.  605 

IIuc  patcr  Aeneas  ct  bcUo  lccta  juventus 

Succedunt,  fessique  et  equos  et  corpora  curant. 

At  Venus  aetberios  inter  dea  candida  nimbos 
Dona  ferens  aderat ;  natumque  in  valle  reducta 
Ut  procul  et  gciido  secretum  flumiue  vidit,  610 

Tabbus  affata  est  dictis,  scque  obtulit  ultro : 
"  En  perfecta  mei  promissa  conjugis  arte 
"  Munera,  ne  mox  aut  Laurentes,  nate,  superbos, 
"  Aut  acrem  dubites  in  proelia  poscerc  Turnum." 
Dixit  ct  amplcxus  nati  Cytherea  petivit ;  615 

Arma  sub  adversa  posuifc  radiantia  qucrcu. 
Ille,  deae  donis  et  tanto  laetus  honore, 
Explcri  nequit  atque  oculos  per  singula  volvit, 
Miraturque  interque  manus  et  brachia  versat 
Terribilcm  cristis  galeam  flammasque  vomentcm,         620 
Fatiferumque  ensem,  loricam  ex  aere  rigentem, 
Sanguineam,  ingentem,  qualis  quum  caerula  nubes 
Solis  inardescit  radiis  longeque  refulget ; 
Tum  levcs  ocrcas  elcctro  auroquc  recocto, 
Hastamque,  et  clipei  non  enarrabile  textum.  625 

Illic  res  Italas  Eomauorumque  triumj)hos, 
Haud  vatum  ignarus  venturique  inscius  aevi, 
Fecerat  Ignipotens ;  illic  genus  omne  futurae 
Stirpis  ab  Ascanio  pugnataque  in  ordine  bella. 
Fccerat  et  viridi  fetam  Mavortis  iu  antro  630 

Procubuisse  lupam :  geminos  huic  ubera  circum 
Ludere  pendentes  pueros,  et  lamberc  matrcm 
Irapavidos  ;  illam  tcreti  ccrvicc  reflcxam 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    VIII.  191 

Mulcere  alternos,  et  corpora  iingere  lingua. 

Nec  prociil  liinc  Eomam  et  raptas  sine  more  Sabinas  635 

Consessu  caveae,  magnis  Circensibus  actis, 

Addiderat,  subitoque  novum  consurgere  belhim 

Komulidis  Tatioque  seni  Curibusque  severis. 

Post  idem,  inter  se  posito  certaminc,  reges 

Armati  Jovis  ante  aram  pateras(|ue  tenentes  640 

Stabant  et  caesa  jungebant  foedera  porca. 

Haud  procul  inde  citae  Metum  in  diversa  quadrigae 

Distulerant-at  tu  dictis,  Albane,  maneres !-, 

Eaptabatque  viri  mendacis  viscera  Tullus 

Per  silvam,  et  sparsi  rorabant  sanguine  vepres.  645 

Nec  non  Tarquinium  ejectum  Porsenna  jubebat 

Accipere,  ingentique  urbem  obsidione  premebat ; 

Aeneadae  in  ferrum  pro  libertate  ruebant. 

Illum  indignanti  similem  similemque  minanti 

Adspiceres,  pontem  auderet  quia  vellere  Cocles,  650 

Et  fluvium  vinclis  iunaret  Cloelia  ruptis. 

In  summo  custos  Tarpeiae  Manlius  arcis 

Stabat  pro  templo  et  Capitolia  celsa  tenebat, 

Romuleoque  rccens  borrebat  regia  culmo. 

Atque  liic  auratis  volitans  argenteus  anser  655 

Porticibus  GaUos  in  limine  adesse  canebat ; 

Gralli  per  dumos  aderant,  arcemque  tenebant, 

Defensi  tenebris  et  dono  noctis  opacae  : 

Aurea  caesaries  oUis  atque  aurea  vestis ; 

Virgatis  lucent  sagidis  ;  tum  lactea  colla  660 

Auro  innectuntur ;  duo  quisque  Alpina  coruscant 

Gaesa  manu,  scutis  protecti  corpora  long-is. 

Hic  exsultantes  Salios  nudosque  Lupercos, 

Lanigerosque  a^^ices  et  lapsa  ancdia  coelo 

Extuderat ;  castae  ducebant  sacra  per  urbem  665 

Pilentis  matres  in  mollibus.     Hinc  procul  addit 

Tartareas  etiam  sedes,  alta  ostia  Ditis, 


192  AENEIDOS    LIB.    VIII. 

Et  scelerum  poenas,  ct  te,  Catilina,  minaci 

Pendentem  scopulo  Furiammque  ora  trementem  : 

Secretosque  i^ios  ;  liis  dantem  jura  Catoncm.  670 

Haec  inter  tumidi  late  maris  ibat  imago 

Aurea ;  sed  fluctu  spumabant  cacrula  cauo, 

Et  circum  argento  clari  delphines  in  orbem 

Aequora  verrebant  caudis,  aestumque  secabant. 

In  medio  classes  aeratas,  Actia  bella,  675 

Cernere  erat ;  totumque  instructo  Marte  videres 

Fervere  Leucaten,  auroque  effulgere  fluctus. 

Hinc  Augustus  agens  Italos  in  proelia  Caesar 

Cum  Patribus  Populoque,  Penatibus  et  magnis  Dis, 

Stans  celsa  in  puppi :  geminas  cui  tempora  flammas    680 

Lacta  voiliunt,  patriumque  aperitur  vertice  sidus  ; 

Parte  alia  ventis  et  dis  Agrippa  secuudis 

Arduus  agmen  agens :  cui,  belli  insigne  superbum, 

Tempora  navali  fulgent  rostrata  corona. 

Hinc  ope  barbarica  variisque  Antonius  armis,  685 

Victor  ab  Aurorae  j)opulis  et  litore  rubro, 

Aegyptum  viresque  Orientis  et  ultima  secum 

Bactra  vehit ;  sequiturque-nefas  !  -  Aegyptia  conjux, 

Una  omnes  ruere,  ac  totum  spumare  reductis 

Convulsum  remis  rostrisque  tridentibus  aequor.  690 

Alta  petunt :  pelago  credas  innare  revulsas 

Cycladas,  aut  montes  concurrerc  montibus  altos  : 

Tanta  mole  viri  turritis  puppibus  instant. 

Stuppea  flamma  manu  telique  voLatile  ferrum 

Spargitur  ;  arva  nova  Neptunia  caede  rubcscunt.         695 

liegina  in  incdiis  jmtrio  vocat  agmina  sistro, 

Necdum  etiam  geminos  a  tergo  respicit  angues. 

Onmigenumque  deitm  monstra  et  latrator  Anubis 

Contra  Neptnnum  ct  Veneiem  contraque  ]\Iinervam 

Tela  tenent.     Saevit  medio  in  certamine  Mavors  700 

Caelatus  ferro,  tristcsquc  ex  aetlierc  Dirae  ; 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    VIII,  193 

Et  scissa  gaudens  vadit  Discordia  palla, 
Quam  ciim  sanguineo  sequitur  Bellona  flagello. 
Actius  haec  cernens  arcum  intendebat  ApoUo 
Desuper :  omnis  eo  tcrrore  Aegyptus  et  Indi,  705 

Omnis  AraLs,  omnes  vertebant  terga  Sabaei  ; 
Ipsa  videbatur  ventis  regina  vocatis 
Vela  dare,  et  laxos  jam  jamque  immittero  funes. 
Illani  inter  caedes  pallentem  morte  futura 
Fecerat  ignijjotens  undis  et  lapyge  ferri ;  710 

Contra  autem  magno  maerentem  corpore  Nilum, 
Pandentemque  sinus  et  tota  veste  vocantem 
Caeruleum  in  gremium  latebrosaque  flumina  victos. 
At  Caesar,  triplici  invectus  Komana  triumpho 
Moenia,  dis  Italis  votum  immortale  sacrabat,  715 

Maxima  tercentum  totam  delubra  per  Urbem. 
Laetitia  ludisque  viae  plausuque  fremebant ; 
Omnibus  in  templis  matrum  cliorus,  omnibus  arae ; 
Ante  aras  terram  caesi  stravere  juvenci. 
Ipse,  sedens"niveo  candentis  limine  Phoebi,  720 

Dona  recognoscit  populorum,  aptatque  superbis 
Postibus :  incedunt  victae  longo  ordine  gentes, 
Quam  variae  linguis,  habitu  tam  vestis  et  armis. 
Hic  Nomadum  genus  et  discinctos  Mulciber  Afros, 
Hic  Lelegas  Carasque  sagittiferosque  Gelonos  725 

Finxerat  ;  Euphrates  ibat  jam  mollior  undis, 
Extremique  hominum  Morini,  Khenusque  bicornis, 
Indomitique  Dahae,  et  pontem  indignatus  Araxes. 
Talia  per  clipeum  Vulcani,  dona  parentisj 
Miratur,  rerumque  ignarus  imagine  gaudet,  730 

Attollens  humero  famamque  ot  fata  nepotum. 
9 


P.  VIPtGILII   MAIIONIS 

AENEIDOS 

LIBER  NONUS. 


Atqiie  ea  diversa  pcnitiis  cliim  parte  gerimtur, 

Irim  de  coelo  misit  Saturuia  Juno 

Audacem  ad  Turnum.     Luco  tum  forte  i^arentis 

Pilumni  Turnus  sacrata  valle  sedebat. 

Ad  quem  sic  rosco  Thaumantias  ore  locuta  est :  5 

"  Turne,  quod  optanti  divum  promittere  nemo 

"  Auderet,  volvenda  dies,  en,  attulit  ultro. 

"  Aeneas,  urbe  et  sociis  et  classe  relicta, 

"  Sceptra  Palatini  sedemque  petit  Evandri ; 

"  Nec  satis  :  extremas  Corytlii  penetravit  ad  urbes,       10 

"  Lydorumque  manum  collectosq^uc  armat  agrestes. 

"  Quid  dubitas  .^  Nunc  tempus  equos,  nunc  poscere  curnis. 

"  liumpe  moras  omnes  et  turbata  arripe  castra." 

Dixit,  et  in  coclum  paribus  so  sustulit  alis, 

Ingcntemq[ue  fuga  secuit  sub  nubibus  arcum.  15 

Agnovit  juvenis,  duplicesque  ad  sidera  palmas 

Sustulit  ac  tali  fugientem  est  voce  secutus  : 

"  Iri,  decus  cocli,  quis  tc  mibi  nubibus  actam        ^ 

"  Detulit  in  tcrras  ?  undc  hacc  tam  clara  repente 

"Tempestas?     Mcdium  video  discedere  coelum,  20 

"  Palantesquc  polo  stellas.     Sequor  omiija  taijta, 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    IX.  195 

"  Quisquis  in  arma  vocas."     Et  sic  effatus  ad  undam 

Processit,  summoque  liausit  de  gurgite  lymphas, 

Multa  deos  orans,  oneravitque  aethera  votis, 

Jamque  omnis  campis  exercitus  ibat  apertis,  25 

Dives  equum,  dives  pictai  vestis  et  auri :- 

Messapus  primas  acies,  postrema  coercent 

Tyrrhidae  juvenes  ;  medio  dux  agmine  Turnus 

[Vertitur  arma  tenens,  et  toto  vertice  supra  est:]- 

Ceu  septem  surgens  sedatis  amnibus  altus  30 

Per  tacitum  Ganges,  aut  pingui  flumine  Nilus 

Quum  refluit  campis  et  jam  se  condidit  alveo. 

Hic  subitam  nigro  glomerari  pulvere  nubem 

Prospiciunt  Teucri,  ac  tenebras  insurgere  campis. 

Primus  ab  adversa  conclamat  mole  Caicus  :  35 

"  Quis  globus,  0  cives,  cahgine  volvitur  atra  ? 

"  Ferte  citi  ferrum,  date  tela,  ascendite  muros  : 

"  Hostis  adest,  eia  !  "     Ingenti  clamore  per  omnes 

Condunt  se  Teucri  portas,  et  moenia  complent : 

Namque  ita  discedens  praeceperat  optimus  armis  40 

Aeneas,  si  qua  interea  fortuna  fuisset, 

Neu  struere  auderent  aciem,  neu  credere  campo ; 

Castra  modo  et  tutos  servarent  aggere  muros. 

Ergo  etsi  conferre  manum  pudor  iraque  monstrat, 

Objiciunt  portas  tamen,  et  praecepta  facessunt,  45 

Armatique  cavis  exspectant  turribus  hostem. 

Turnus,  ut  ante  volans  tardum  praecesserat  agmen, 

Viginti  lectis  equitum  comitatus  et  urbi 

Improvisus  adest :  maculis  quem  Thracius  albis 

Portat  equus,  cristaque  tegit  galea  aurea  rubra.  50 

*'  Ecquis  erit,  mecum,  juvenes,  qui  primus  in  hostem....? 

"  En  !  "  ait,  et  jaculum  attorquens  emittit  in  auras, 

Principium  pugnae,  et  campo  sese  arduus  infert. 

Clamore  excipiunt  socii,  fremituque  sequuntur 

Horrisono ;  Teucrum  mirantur  inertia  corda,  ^^ 


196  AENEIDOS   LIB,    IX. 

Non  aequo  dare  se  campo,  non  obvia  ferre 

Arma  viros,  sed  castra  fovere.     Huc  turbidus  atque  liuc 

Lustrat  equo  muros,  aditumque  per  avia  quaerit. 

Ac  veluti  pleno  lupus  insidiatus  ovili 

Quum  fremit  ad  caulas,  ventos  perpcssus  et  imbres,       60 

Nocte  super  media :  -  tuti  sub  matribus  agni 

Balatum  exercent ;  ille  asper  et  improbus  ira 

Saevit  in  absentes  :  collecta  fatigat  edendi 

Ex  longo  rabies,  et  siccae  sanguine  fauces :- 

Haud  aliter  Kutulo  muros  et  castra  tuenti  G5 

Ignescunt  irae  ;  duris  dolor  ossibus  ardet, 

Qua  tentet  ratione  aditus,  et  quae  via  clausos 

Excutiat  Teucros  vallo  atque  effundat  in  aequum. 

Classem,  quae  latcri  castrorum  adjuncta  latebat, 

Aggeribus  septam  circum  et  fluvialibus  undis,  VO 

Invadit,  sociosque  incendia  poscit  ovantes, 

Atque  manum  pinu  ilagranti  fervidus  implet. 

Tum  vero  incumbunt :  urget  praesentia  Turni ; 

Atque  omnis  facibus  pubes  accingitur  atris. 

Diripuere  focos  ;  piceum  fert  fumida  lumen  75 

Taeda,  et  commixtam  Vulcanus  ad  astra  favillam. 

Quis  deus,  o  Musae,  tam  saeva  incendia  Teucris 
Avertit  ?  tantos  ratibus  quis  depulit  ignes  ? 
Dicite  !     Prisca  fides  facto,  sed  fama  perennis. 
Tempore  quo  j)rimum  Phrygia  formabat  in  Ida  80 

Aeneas  classem  et  pelagi  petere  alta  parabat, 
Ipsa  deum  fertur  genetrix  Berecyntia  magnum 
Vocibus  liis  aifata  Jovem  :  "  Da,  nate,  petenti, 
"  Quod  tua  cara  parens  domito  te  poscit  Olympo. 
"  Pinea  silva  mihi,  multos  dilecta  per  annos;  85 

"  Lucus  in  arce  fuit  suinma,  quo  sacra  ferebant, 
"  Nigranti  picea  trabibusque  obscurus  acernis : 
"  Has  ego  Dardanio  jufeni,  quum  classis  egeret, 
"  Laeta  dcdi  ;  nunc  sollicitam  timor  auxius  anjxit. 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    IX,  197 

"  Solve  metuSj  atque  lioc  precibus  sine  posse  parentem,  90 
"  Neu  cursu  quassatae  uUo,  neu  turbine  venti 
"  Yincantur  ;  prosit  nostris  in  montibus  ortas," 
Filius  huic  contra,  torquet  qui  sidera  mundi : 
"  0  genetrix,  quo  fata  vocas,  aut  quid  petis  istis  ? 
"  Mortaline  manu  factae  immortale  carinae  95 

"  Fas  liabeant,  certust^ue  incerta  pericula  lustret 
"  Aeneas  ?     Cui  tanta  deo  permissa  potestas  ? 
"  Immo,  ubi  defunctae  finem  portusque  tenebunt 
"  Ausonios  olim,  quaecumque  evaserit  undis 
"  Dardaniumque  ducera  Laurentia  vexerit  arva,  100 

"  Mortalem  eripiam  formam,  magnique  jubebo 
"  Aequoris  esse  deas,  qualis  Nereia  Doto 
"  Et  Galatea  secaut  spumantem  pectore  pontum." 
Dixcrat,  idque  ratum  Stygii  per  flumina  fratris, 
Per  pice  torrentes  atraque  voragine  ripas  105 

Annuit,  et  totum  nutu  tremefecit  Olympum. 
Ergo  aderat  promissa  dies,  et  tempora  Parcae 
Debita  complerant:  quum.Turni  injuria  Matrem 
Admonuit  ratibus  sacris  depellere  taedas. 
Hic  primum  nova  lux  oculis  offulsit,  et  ingens  110 

Visus  ab  Aurora  coclum  transcurrere  nimbus, 
Idaeique  cliori ;  tum  vox  horrenda  per  auras 
Excidit  et  Troum  Kutulorumque  agmina  complet : 
"  Ne  trepidate  meas,  Teucri,  defendere  naves, 
"  Neve  armate  manus  :  maria  ante  exurcre  Turno,      115 
"  Quam  sacras  dabitur  pinus.     Vos  ite  solutae, 
"  Ite  deae  pelagi:  genetrix  jubet."     Et  sua  quaeque 
Continuo  puppes  abrumpunt  vincula  ripis, 
Delphinumque  modo  demersis  aequora  rostris 
Ima  petunt ;  hinc  virgiueae-mirabile  monstrum  !-        120 
Keddunt  se  totidem  facies  pontoque  feruntur, 
[Quot  prius  aeratae  steterant  ad  litora  prorae.] 
Obstupuere  animi  Kutulis ;  conterritus  ipse 


198  AENEIDOS   LIB.    IX. 

Turbatis  Messapus  equis  ;  cunctatur  et  amnis 

Rauca  sonans  revocatque  pedem  Tiberinus  ab  alto.      125 

At  non  audaci  Tnrno  Mucia  ccssit ; 

Ultro  animos  tollit  dictis,  atquc  increpat  ultro  : 

"  Trojanos  haec  monstra  petunt,  his  Jupiter  ipse 

"  AuxiHum  solitum  eripuit ;  non  tela  neque  ignes 

"  Exspectant  Rutulos.     Ergo  maria  invia  Teucris,       130 

"  Nec  spes  uUa  fugae :  rerum  pars  altera  ademta  est, 

"  Terra  autem  in  nostris  manibus  :  tot  millia,  gentes 

"  Arma  ferunt  Italae.     Nil  me  fatalia  terrent, 

"  Si  qua  Pbryges  prae  se  jactant,  responsa  deorum. 

"  Sat  fatis  Yenerique  datum,  tetigere  quod  arva  135 

'*  Fertilis  Ausoniac  Troes.     Sunt  et  mca  contra 

"  Fata  milii,  ferro  sceleratam  exscindere  geutem, 

"  Conjuge  praerepta ;  nec  solos  tangit  Atridas 

''  Iste  dolor,  solisque  licet  capere  arma  Mycenis. 

*•'  Sed  periisse  semel  satis  est.     Peccare  fuisset  140 

"  Ante  satis,  pcnitus  modo  non  genus  omne  perosos 

"  Femineum  ;  quibus  baec  medii  fiducia  valli 

"  Fossaruraque  morae,  leti  discrimina  parva, 

"  Dant  animos.     At  non  viderunt  moenia  Trojae 

"  Neptuni  fabricata  manu  considere  in  ignes  ?  145 

"  Sed  vos,  o  lecti,  ferro  quis  scindere  vallum 

"  Apparat  et  mecum  invadit  trepidantia  castra  ? 

"  Non  armis  mihi  Vulcani,  non  mille  carinis 

"  Est  opus  in  Teucros.     Addant  se  protenus  omnes 

"  Etrusci  socios.     Tenebras  et  inertia  furta  150 

"  Palladii,  caesis  sumniae  custodibus  arcis, 

"  Ne  timeant ;  nec  cqui  caeca  condemur  in  alvo  : 

"  Luce  palam  certum  ost  igni  circumdare  muros. 

"  Haud  sibi  cum  Danais  rem  faxo  ct  })ube  Pelasga 

"'  Esse  putent,  decimum  quos  distulit  Hector  in  annum.  155 

"  Nunc  adeo,  melior  quoniam  pars  acta  diei, 

"  Quod  superest,  laeti  bene  gestis  corpora  rebus 


AENEIDOS    LIB,    IX.  199 

"  Procurate,  viri,  et  piignam  sperate  jDarari." 

Interea  vigilum  excubiis  obsidere  portas 

Cnra  datur  Messapo,  et  moenia  cingere  flammis.  160 

Bis  septem  Kutuli,  muros  qui  milite  servent, 

Delecti ;  ast  illos  centeni  quemque  sequuntur 

Purpurei  cristis  juvenes  auroque  corusci. 

Discurrunt,  variantque  vices,  fusique  per  herbam 

Indulgent  vino,  et  vertunt  crateras  ahenos.  165 

CoUucent  ignes  ;  noctem  custodia  ducit 

Insomnem  ludo. 

Haec  super  e  vallo  prospectant  Troes  et  armis 
Alta  tenent,  nec  non  trepidi  formidine^  portas 
Explorant,  pontesque  et  propugnacula  jungunt,  170 

Tela  genmt.     Instant  Mnestheus  acerci[ue  Serestus, 
Quos  pater  Aeneas,  si  quando  adversa  vocarent. 
Rectores  juvenum  et  rerum  dedit  esse  magistros. 
Omnis  per  muros  legio,  sortita  periclum, 
Excubat  exercetque  vices,  quod  cuique  tuendum  est.  175 
Nisus  erat  portae  custos,  acerrimus  armis, 
Hyrtacides,  comitem  Aeneae  quem  miserat  Ida 
Venatrix,  jaculo  celerem  levibusque  sagittis ; 
Et  juxta  comes  Euryalus,  quo  j^ulchrior  alter 
Non  fuit  Aeneadum,  Trojana  neque  induit  arma,         180 
Ora  puer  prima  signans  intonsa  juventa. 
His  amor  unus  erat,  pariterque  in  bella  ruebant ; 
Tum  quoque  communi  portam  statione  tenebant. 
Nisus  ait :  "  Dine  hunc  ardorem  mentibus  addunt, 
"  Euryale,  an  sua  cuique  deus  fit  dira  cupido  ?      "        185 
"  Aut  pugnam  aut  aliquid  jam  dudum  invadere  magoum 
'^Mens  agitat  mihi,  nec  placida  contenta  quiete  est. 
"  Cernis,  quae  Rutulos  habeat  fiducia  rerum. 
"  Lumina  rara  micant,  somno  vinoque  soluti 
"  Procubuere,  silent  late  loca.     Percipe  porro,  190 

"  Quid  dubitem,  et  quae  nunc  animo  sententia  surgat. 


200  AENEIDOS    LIB,    IX. 

"  Aenean  acciri  omncs,  populusque  patresque, 

"  Exposcunt,  mittiquc  viros,  qui  certa  reportent. 

"  Si,  tibi  quae  posco,  promittunt-nam  milii  facti 

'*'  Fama  sat  est-;  tumulo  vicleor  reperire  sub  illo  195 

"  Posse  viam  acl  muros  et  moenia  Pallantea." 

Obstupuit  magno  laudum  percussus  amore 

Euryalus ;  simul  his  arclentem  affatur  araicum  : 

'•'  Mene  igitur  socium  summis  adjungere  rebus, 

"  Nise,  fugis .?     Solum  te  in  tanta  pericula  mittarn  ?  200 

"  Non  ita  me  genitor,  bellis  assuetus  Opheltes, 

''  Argolicum  terrorcm  inter  Trojaequc  labores 

"  Sublatum  eradiity^nec  tecum  talia  gessi, 

"  Magnanimum  Aenean  et  fata  extrema  secutus :    ^ 

"  Est  bic,  est  animus  lucis  contcmtor,  et  istum  205 

"  Qui  vita  bene  creclat  emi,  quo  tendis,  honorem." 

Nisus  ad  haec  :  "  Equidem  de  te  nil  tale  verebar ; 

"  Nec  fas ;  non  :  ita  me  referat  tibi  magnus  ovantem 

"  Ju2)iter,  aut  quicumque  oculis  haec  adspicit  aequis. 

"  Sed  si  quis-quae  multa  vides  discrimine  tali-  210 

"  Si  quis  in  adversum  rapiat  casusve  deusve  ; 

"  Te  superesse  velim  :  tua  vita  dignior  aetas. 

"  Sit,  qui  me  raptum  pugna  prctiove  redemtum 

"  Mandet  humo ;  solita  aut  si  qua  id  fortuna  vetabit, 

"  Absenti  ferat  inferias  decorctque  scpulcro.  215 

"  Neu  matri  miscrae  tanti  sim  causa  doloris, 

"  Quae  te  sola,  puer,  multis  e  matribus  ausa, 

"  Pcrsequitur,  magni  ncc  moonia  curat  Acestac." 

Ille  autcfm  "  Causas  ncquidquam  nectis  inanes, 

"  Nec  mea  jam  mutata  loco  sentcntia  cedit.  220 

"  Acceleremus  !  "  ait ;  vigilcs  simul  excitat.     Illi 

Succedunt  servantque  vices  ;  statione  rclicta 

Ipse  comes  Niso  graditur,  regcmque  requiruut. 

Cetera  per  torras  omnes  animalia  somno 
Tjaxabant  curas  et  corda  ol)lita  laborum ;  225 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    IX,  20] 

Ductorcs  Teucrum  primi,  delecta  juventus, 
Consilium  summis  regni  de  rebus  liabebant, 
Quid  facerent,  quisve  Aeneae  jam  nuntius  esset : 
Stant  longis  adnixi  hastis  et  scuta  tenentes 
Castrorum  et  campi  medio.     Tum  Nisus  et  una  230 

Euryalus  confestim  alacres  admittifer  orant : 
Rem  magnam,  pretiumque  morae  fore.     Primus  lulus 
Accepit  trepidos,  ac  Nisum  dicere  jussit. 
Tum  sic  Hyrtacides  :  "  Audite  o  mentibus  aequis, 
'  Aeneadae,  neve  haec  nostris  spectentur  ab  annis,      235 
'  Quae  ferimus.     Eutuli  somno  vinoque  soluti 
'  Conticuere  ;  locum  insidiis  conspeximus  ipsi, 
'  Qui  patet  in  bivio  portae,  quae  proxima  ponto  ; 
'  Interrupti  ignes,  aterque  ad  sidera  fumus 
'  Erigitur :  si  fortuna  permittitis  uti,  240 

'  Quaesitum  Aenean  et  moenia  Pallantea  ; 
'  Mox  hic  cura  spoliis,  ingenti  caede  peracta, 
Affore  cernetis.     Nec  nos  via  fallit  euntes : 
Vidimus  obscuris  primam  sub  vallibus  urbem 
Venatu  assiduo  et  totum  cognovimus  amnem."  245 

Hic  annis  gfavis  atque  animi  maturus  Aletes : 
*''  Di  patrii,  qubrum  sempcr  sub  numine  Troja  est, 
"  Non  tamen  omnino  Teucros  dclere  paratis, 
"  Quum  tales  animos  juvenum  et  tam  certa  tulistis 
"  Pectora.''  Sic  memorans,bumeros  dcxtrasque  tenebat  250 
Amborum,  et  vultum  lacrimis  atque  ora  rigabat : 
"  Quae  vobis,  quae  digna,  viri,  pro  laudibus  istis 
"  Praemia  posse  rcar  solvi .?     Pulcberrima  primum 
"  Di  moresque  dabunt  vcstri ;  tum  cetera  reddet 
"  Actutum  pius  Aencas,  atquc  intcger  aevi  255 

"  Ascanius,  mcriti  tantf  non  immemor  umquam." 

"  Immo  ego  vos,  cui  sola  salus  genitoro  reducto," 
Excipit  Ascanius  "  pcr  magnos,  Nisc,  Penates 
"  Assai-acique  Larem  ct  canae  penetralia  Vestae 
9* 


202  AENEIDOS    LIB.    IX. 

*'  Obtcstor :  quaccumqiic  milii  fortuna  fidcsque  est,      260 
"  In  vestris  pono  gremiis :  Vevocate  parentem, 
"  Kcddite  conspcctum  ;  nihil  illo  triste  reccpto. 
"  Bina  dabo  argento  pcrfecta  atq[ue  aspcra  signis 
"  Pocula,  devicta  genitor  quae  cepit  Arisba, 
'*Et  tripodas  geminos,  auri  duo  magna  talenta,  265 

"  Cratera  antiquum,  quem  dat  Sidonia  Dido. 
"  Si  vero  capere  Italiam  sceptrisque  potiri 
"  Contigcrit  victori,  et  i^raedae  diccre  sortem : 
''  Vidisti,  quo  Turnus  equo,  quibus  ibat  in  armis 
''  Aureus  :  ipsum  illum,  clipeum  cristasque  rubentes  270 
"  Excipiam  sorti,  jam  nunc  tua  praemia,  Nise. 
"  Praeterea  bis  sex  genitor  lectissima  matrum 
^'  Corpora  captivosque  dabit,  suaque  omnibus  arma ; 
,'Insuper  his,  campi  quod  rex  habet.ij)se  Latinus. 
"  Te  vero,  mea  quem  spatiis  propioribus  aetas  275 

"  Insequitur,  venerande  puer,  jam  pectore  toto 
"  Accipio  ct  comitem  casus  complcctor  in  omnes. 
"  Nulla  meis  sine  te  quaeretur  gloria  rcbus : 
"  Seu  pacem  seu  bella  geram,  tibi  maxima  rerura 
"  Vcrborumque  fides."     Contra  quem  talia  fatur  280 

Euryalus :  "  Me  nulla  dies  tam  fortibus  ausis  .v) 
"  Dissimilem  arguerit :  tantum  fortuna  secunda 
"  Haud  adversa  cadat.     Scd  te  suj)er  omnia  dona 
"  Unum  oro :  genetrix  Priami  de  gente  vetusta 
"  Est  mihi,  quam  miseram  temiit  non  Ilia  teUus  285 

•  Mccum  exccdcntcm,  non  mocnia  regis  Acestae  : 
"  Ilanc  cgo  nunc  ignaram  hujus  quodcumque  pcricli  est 
"  Inquc  salutatam  linquo, — Nox  et  tua  tcttis 
"  Dextcra,  quod  nequeam  lacrimas  perferre  parentis ; 
'  At  tu,  oro,  solare  inopcm,  ct  succurre  rclictae.  290 

"  llanc  sine  me  spem  fcrrc  tui :  audcntior  ibo 
"  In  casus  omnes."     Pcrcussa  mente  dedere 
Dardaiiidae  lacrimas,  autc  ouincs  jiulehcr  Inlns, 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    IX.  203 

Atque  animum  patriae  strinxit  pietatis  imago. 

Tum  sic  effatur  :  295 

"  Sponde  digna  tuis  ingentibus  omnia  coeptis : 

''  Namque  erit  ista  mihi  genetrix,  nomenque  Creusae 

"  Solum  defuerit,  nec  partum  gratia  talem 

"  Parva  manet.     Casus  factum  quicumque  sequentur ; 

"  Per  caput  hoc  juro,  per  quod  pater  ante  solebat :       300 

"  Quae  tibi  poUiceor  redu^ji  rebusque  secundis, 

*'  Haec  eadem  matrique  tuae  generique  manebunt." 

Sic  ait  illacrimans ;  humero  simul  exuit  ensem 

Auratum,  mira  quem  fecerat  arte  Lycaon 

Gnosius  atque  habilem  vagina  aptarat  eburna.  305 

Dat  Niso  Mnestheus  pellem  horrentisque  leonis 

Exuvias';  galeam  fidus  permutat  Aletes. 

Protenus  armati  incedunt ;  quos  omnis  euntes 

Primorum  manus  ad  portas,  juvenumque  senumque, 

Prosequitur  votis.     Nec  non  et  pulcher  lulus,  310 

Ante  annos  animumque  gerens  curamque  virilem, 

Multa  patri  mandata  dabat  portanda.     Sed  aurae 

Omnia  discerpunt  et  nubibus  irrita  donant. 

Egressi  superant  fossas,  noctisque  per  umbram 
Castra  iuimica  petunt,  multis  tamen  ante  futuri  31^ 

Exitio.     Passim  somno  vinoqite  per  herbam 
Corpora  fusa  vident,  arrectos  litore  currus, 
Inter  lora  rotasque  Adros,  simul  arma  jacere, 
Vina  simul.     Prior  HjTtacides  sic  ore  locutus  : 
"  Euryale,  audendum  dextra :  nunc  ipsa  vocat  res.      320 
"  Hac  iter  est :  tu,  ne  qua  manus  se  attollere  nobis 
"  A  tergo  possit,  custodi  et  consule  longe ; 
''  Haec  ego  vasta  dabo,  et  hato  to  limite  ducam." 
Sic  memorat,  vocemque  premit ;  simul  ense  superbum 
Rhamnetem  aggreditur,  qui  forte  tapetibus  altis  325 

Exstructus  toto  proflabat  pectore  somnum, 
Rex  idera  et  regi  Turno  gratissimus  augur ; 


204  AENEIDOS    LIB.    IX. 

Sed  non.  aiiguiio  potuit  depellcro  pcstem. 

Trcs  juxta  famulos,  temere  inter  tela  jacentes, 

Armigerumque  Eemi  prcmit  aurigamque,  sub  ipsis      33C 

Nactus  equis,  ferroquc  secat  pendentia  colla. 

Tum  caput  ipsi  aufert  domino,  truncumque  relinquit 

Sanguine  singultantem  :  atro  tepefacta  cruore 

Terra  torique  madent.    Nec  non  Lamyrumque  Lamumque, 

Et  juvcnem  Serranura,  illa  qui  plurima  nocte  335 

Luserat,  insignis  facie,  multoque  jacebat 

Membra  deo  victus:  felix,  si  protenus  illum 

Acquasset  nocti  ludum  iu  lucemquc  tulissct. 

Impastus  ceu  plena  leo  per  ovilia  tuvbans- 

Suadct  enim  vesana  fames  -  manditque  trahitque  340 

MoUe  pecus  mutumque  mctu,  frcmit  ore  cruento. 

Nec  minor  Eurjali  caedes  :  incensus  et  ipse 

Perfurit,  ac  multam  in  medio  sine  nomine  plebem, 

Fadumque  Herbesumque  subit  Eboetumque  Abarmique,- 

Ignaros,  flhoetum  vigilantem  et  cuncta  videntem ;       345 

Sed  magnum  metucns  se  post  cratera  tegebat. 

Pectore  in  adverso  totum  cui  comminus  ensem 

Condidit  assurgcnti,  et  nmlta  morte  reccpit. 

Purpuream  vomit  ille  animam,  et  cum  sanguine  mixta 

Vina  refert  moriens.     Hic  furto  fervidus  instat ;  350 

Jamque  ad  Messapi  tocios  tendebat,  ubi  igneni 

Deficcrc  extremum  et  religatos  rite  videbat 

CariJcre  gramen  equos :  breviter  quum  talia  Nisus  - 

Sensit  enim  nimia  caede  atque  cupidinc  ferri  - 

"  Absistamus : "  ait  '*  nam  lux  inimica  propinquat.       355 

"  Poenarum  cxhaustum  satis  est,  via  facta  pcr  hostes." 

Multa  virilm  solido  argento  perfccta  rehnquunt 

Armaquc,  craterasque  simul,  pulchrosque  tapetas. 

Euryahis  phalcras  lihnmnetis  et  aurca  bulhs 

CinKuhx,  -Tiburti  Kemulo  ditissimus  ohm  360 

Quae  mittit  dona,  iios]>itio  quum  jungeret  absens, 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    IX.  205 

Caeclicus^  ille  suo  uioriens  dat  liabere  nciioti, 
Post  niortem  bello  Eutuli  pugnaque  potiti,  - 
Haec  rapit  atque  liumeris  nequidquam  fortibus  aptat ; 
Tum  galeani  Messapi  habilem  cristisque  decoram         365 
Induit.     Exceduut  castris,  et  tuta  capessunt. 
Interea  praemissi  equites  ex  urbe  Latina, 
Cetera  dum  lcgio  campis  instructa  moratur, 
Ibant  et  Turno  regi  responsa  ferebant, 
Terccntum,  scutati  omnes,  Volsccnte  magistro ;  370 

Jamque  propinquabant  castris  muroque  subibant, 
Quum  procul  hos  laevo  flectentes  limite  cernunt, 
Et  galea  Euryahim  subhistri  noctis  in  umbra 
Prodidit  immemorem  radiisque  adversa  refulsit.  374 

Haud  temere  est  visum :  conclamat  ab  agmine  Volscens : 
"  State,  viri !     Quae  causa  viae,  quive  estis  in  armis,  376 
"  Quove  tenetis  iter  ?  "     Nihd  illi  tendere  contra ; 
Sed  celerare  fugam  in  silvas  et  fidere  nocti. 
Objiciunt  equites  sese  ad  divortia  nota 
Hinc  atque  hinc,  omnemque  abitum  custode  coronant.  380 
Silva  fuit,  late  diimis  atque  ilice  nigra 
Horrida,  quam  densi  complerant  undique  sentes, 
Eara  per  occultos  lucebat  semita  callcs. 
Euryahim  tencbrae  ramorum  oncrosaque  j^raeda 
Impediunt,  fallitque  timor  regioue  viarum.  385 

Nisus  abit ;  jamque  imprudens  evaserat  hostes 
Atque  locos,  qui  post  Albae  de  nomine  dicti 
Albani,  tum  rex  stabula  alta  Latinus  habebat ; 
Ut  stetit  et  frustra  absentem  respexit  amicum. 
"  Euryale  infehx,  qua  te  regione  rchqui  ?  390 

"  Quave  sequar,  rursus  perplexum  itcr  omne  revolvens 
"  FaUacis  siLvae  ?  "     Simul  et  vestigia  retro 
Observata  legit,  dumisque  sdentibus  crrat. 
Audit  equos,  audit  strepitus  et  signa  scquentum. 
Nec  longum  in  medio  tempus,  quum  clamor  ad  aures  395 


206  AENEIDOS   LIB.    IX. 

Pervenit  ac  videt  Euryalum,  quem  jam  manus  omnis 
Fraude  loci  ct  noctis,  subito  turbante  tumultu, 
Oppressum  rapit  et  conantem  plurima  frustra. 
Quid  fiiciat  ?  qua  vi  juvenem,  quibus  audeat  armis 
Eripere  7  an  sese  medios  moriturus  in  hostes  400 

Inferat,  et  pulchram  properet  per  vulnera  mortem  ? 
Ocius  adducto  torquens  liastile  lacerto, 
Susjiicieus  altam  ad  Lunam,  sic  voce  precatur : 
'*  Tu,  dea,  tu  praesens  nostro  succurre  labori, 
"  Astroruni  decus  et  nemorum  Latonia  custos  !  405 

"  Si  qua  tuis  umquam  pro  me  pater  Hyrtacus  aris 
"  Dona  tulit,  si  qua  ipse  meis  venatibus  auxi, 
"  Suspendive  tholo,  aut  sacra  ad  fastigia  fixi; 
"  Hunc  sine  me  turbare  globum,  et  rcge  tela  per  auras !  " 
Dixerat,  et  toto  connixus  corpore  ferrum  410 

Conjicit.     Hasta  volans  noctis  diverberat  umbras, 
Et  vcnit  aversi  in  tergam  Suhnonis,  ibique 
Frangitur  ac  fisso  transit  praecordia  ligno. 
Volvitur  ille  vomens  calidum  de  pectore  flumen 
Frigidus,  et  longis  singultibus  iha  pulsat.  415 

Diversi  circumspiciunt :  hoc  acrior  idem 
Ecce  ahud  summa  tehim  Ubrabat  ab  aure. 
Dum  trepidant,  iit  hasta  Tago  per  tempus  utrumque, 
Stridens,  trajectoque  haesit  tepcflicta  cerebro. 
Sacvit  atrox  Volscens,  nec  tcH  conspicit  usquam  420 

Auctorem,  nec  quo  se  ardens  immittere  possit. 
'"'  Tu  tamcn  interca  calido  mihi  sanguine  poenas 
"  Pcrsolvcs  amborum  "  inquit ;  simul  cnse  rechiso 
Ibat  in  Euryahim.     Tum  vero  exterritus,  amens, 
Concldimat  Nisus,  nec  se  cehire  tenebris  42  j 

Amplius  aut  tautum  potuit  perierre  dolorcm. 
'  Me,  me,  adsum  qui  feci,  iu  me  convcrtitc  fcrrum, 
"  0  Rutuli !  inea  fraus  omnis  ;  nihil  iste  ncc  ausus, 
"  Ncc  potuit :  cuehnn  hiic  ot  conscia  sidcra  testor; 


AENEIDOS    LIB,    IX.  207 

"  Tantum  infelicem  nimium  dilexit  amicum."  430 

Talia  dicta  dabat ;  sed  viribus  ensis  adactus 
Transabiit  costas,  et  candida  pectora  rumpit. 
Volvitur  Euryalus  leto,  pulchrosque  per  artus 
It  cruor,  inque  humeros  cervix  collapsa  recumbit : 
Purpureus  veluti  quum  flos,  succisus  aratro,  4.35 

Languescit  moriens,  lassove  papavera  collo 
Demisere  caput,  pluvia  quum  forte  gravantur. 
At  Nisus  ruit  in  medios,  solumque  per  omnes 
Volscentem  petit,  in  solo  Volscente  moratur.  439 

Quem  circum  giomerati  liostes  hinc  comminus  atque  hinc 
Proturbant.     Instat  non  secius  ac  rotat  ensem  441 

Fulmineum,  donec  Eutuli  clamantis  in  ore 
Condidit  adverso,  et  moriens  animam  abstulit  hosti. 
Tum  super  exanimum  sese  projecit  amicum 
Confossus,  placidaque  ibi  demum  morte  quievit.  445 

Fortunati  ambo  !  si  quid  mea  carmina  possunt, 
NuUa  dies  umquam  memori  vos  eximet  aevo, 
Dum  domus  Aeneae  Capitoli  immobile  saxum 
Accolet,  imperiumquG  pater  Komanus  habebit. 

Victores  praeda  Kutuli  spoliisque  potiti,  450 

Volscentem  exanimum  flentes  in  castra  ferebant. 
Nec  minor  in  castris  luctus,  Khamnete  reperto 
Exsangui,  et  primis  una  tot  caede  peremtis, 
Serranoque  Numaque  :  ingens  concursus  ad  ipsa 
Corpora  seminecesque  viros,  tepidaque  recentem  455 

Caede  locum  et  pleno  spumantes  sanguine  rivos 
Agnoscunt  spolia  inter  se  galcamque  nitentem 
Messapi,  et  multo  phaleras  sudore  receptas. 
Et  jam  prima  novo  spargebat  lumine  terras 
Tithoni  croceum  linquens  Aurora  cubile  :  460 

Jam  sole  infuso,  jam  rebus  luce  retectis, 
Turnus  in  arma  viros,  armis  circumdatus  ipse, 
Sascitat,  aeratasque  acies  in  proelia  cogit 


208  AENEIDOS    LIB.    IX. 

Quisque  suaSj  variisque  acuunt  rumoribus  iras. 
Quin  ipsa  arrectis  -visu  miserabilc  !  -in  liastis  465 

Praefigunt  capita  et  multo  clamore  seqmmtur 
Euiyali  et  Nisi. 

Acneadae  duri  murorum  in  parte  sinistra 
Opposucre  aciem-nam  dextcra  cingitur  amni-, 
Ingcntesque  tenent  fossas,  et  turribus  altis  470 

Stant  maesti ;  simul  ora  virum  praefixa  movebant, 
Nota  nimis  miseris  atroque  fluentia  tabo. 
S-         Interea  pavidam  volitans  pennata  per  urbcm 
Nurftia  Fama  ruit,  matrisquc  allabitur  aures 
Eurj-ali.     At  subitus  miserae  calor  ossa  reliquit ;  475 

Excussi  manibus  radii  revolutaque  pensa. 
Evolat  infelix,  et  femineo  ululatu, 
Scissa  comam,  muros  amens  atque  agmina  cursu 
Prima  petit,  non  illa  virum,  non  illa  pericli 
Tclorumque  memor;  coelum  deliinc  questibus  implet :  480 
'•'  Hunc  ego  te,  Euryalc,  adspicio  ?  tune  ille  scnectac 
''  Scra  meae  rcquies,  potuisti  linqucre  .solam 
"  Crudelis  ?  ncc  tc,  sub  tanta  pericula  missum, 
"  AiFari  extrcmum  miserae  data  copia  matri  ?  • 
"  Hcu,  terra  ignota  canibus  date  praeda  Latinis  485 

"  Alitibusque  jaccs  !  nec  te  in  tua  funera  mater, 
"  Produxi,  prcssive  oculos,  aut  vulnera  lavi,        ' 
"  Ve^^tH^tegcns,  tibi  quam  noctes  festina  diesque 
' '  Urgcbam  ct  tcla  curas  solabar  anilcs. 
"  Quo  sequar,  aut  quae  nunc  artus  avulsaque  membra  490 
'■'  Et  funus  laccrum  tcllus  habct  ?     Hoc  milii  de  te, 
"  Nate,  rcfcrs?  lioc  sum  terraque  marique  secuta? 
"  Figite  mc,  si  qua  cst  pietas ;  in  me  omnia  tela 
"  Conjicite,  o  Kutuli;  me  primam  absumite  ferro; 
"  A  '.it  tu,  magne  patcr  divilm,  miscrere,  tuoque  495 

"  Invisum  hoc  detrude  caput  sub  Tartara  tclo, 
"  Quando  alitcr  ncquco  crudelcm  abrumpcre  vitam  " 


AEXEIDOS    LIB.    IX  209 

Hoc  fletu  conciissi  animi,  maestusque  per  omnes 

It  gemitus ;  torpent  infractae  ad  proelia  vires. 

Illam  incendentcm  luctus  Idaeus  et  Actor,  500 

Ilionei  monitu  et  multum  lacrimantis  luli, 

Corripiunt  interque  manus  sub  tecta  reponunt. 

At  tuba  tcrribilem  sonitum  procul  aere  canoro 
Increpuit ;  sequitur  clamor,  coelumque  remugit. 
Accelerant  acta  pariter  testudino  Volsci,  505 

Et  fossas  implere  parant  ac  vellere  vallum  ; 
Quaerunt  pars  aditum,  et  scalis  adscendere  muros, 
Qua  rara  est  acies,  interlucetque  corona 
iNfon  tam  spissa  viris.     Telorum  effundere  contra 
Omne  geuus  Teucri  ac  duris  detrudere  contis,  510 

Assueti  longo  muros  defendere  bello. 
Saxa  quoque  infesto  volvebant  pondere,  si  qua 
Possent  tectam  aciem  perrumpere ;  quum  tamen  omnes 
Ferre  juvat  subter  densa  testudine  casus. 
Nec  jam  sufficiunt :  nam,  qua  globus  imminet  ingens,  515 
Immanem  Teucri  molem  volvuntque  ruuntque, 
Quae  stravit  Eutulos  late,  armorumque  resolvit 
Tegmina.  ^ec  ;curantlcaeco  contendere  Marte 
Amplius,audaces[EutulT,';sed  pellere  vallo 
Missilibus  certant.  520 

Parte  alia  horrendus  visu  quassabat  Etruscam 
Pinum,  et  fumiferos  infert  Me^^entius  ignes  ; 
At  Messapus  equum  domitor,  Neptunia  proles, 
Eescindit  vallum  et  scalas  in  moenia  poscit. 

Vos,  o  Calliope,  precor,  adspirate  canenti,  525 

Quas  ibi  tunc  ferro  strages,  quae  funera  Turnus 
Ediderit,  quem  quisque  \irum  dcmiserit  Orco; 
Et  mecum  ingentes  oras  evolvite  belli : 
[Et  meministis  enim,  divae,  et  memorare  potestis.] 
Turris  erat  vasto  suspectu  et  pontibus  altis,  530 

Opportuna  loco  :  summis  quam  viribus  omnes 


210  AENEIDOS    LIB.    IX. 

Expugnare  Itali  summaque  evertere  opum  v: 

Certabant,  Troes  contra  defendere  saxis 

Perque  cavas  densi  tela  intorquere  fenestras. 

Princeps  ardentem  conjccit  lampada  Turnus,  535 

Et  flammam  affixit  lateri,  quae  plurima  vento 

Corripuit  tabulas  et  postibus  baesit  adesis. 

Turbati  trcpidarc  iritus,  frustraquc  malorum 

Velle  fugam.     Dum  se  glomerant,  retroque  residunt 

In  partem,  quae  peste  caret :  tum  pondere  turris  540 

Procubuit  subito,  et  coelum  tonat  omne  fragore. 

Semineces  ad  terram,  immani  molo  sccuta, 

Confixique  suis  telis  et  pectora  duro 

Transfossi  ligno  veniunt ;  vix  uuus  Helenor 

Et  Lycus  elapsi :  quorum  primaevus  Helenor,  545 

Maeonio  rcgi  quem  serva  Licymnia  furtim 

Sustulerat  vetitisque  ad  Trojam  miserat  armis, 

Ense  levis  nudo  parmaque  inglorius  alba. 

Isque  ubi  se  Turni  media  inter  miilia  vidit, 

Hinc  acies,  atque  binc  acics  adstare  Latinas  :  550 

Ut  fera,  quae,  densa  venantum  septa  corona, 

Contr-i  tcla  furit,  sescque  baud  nescia  morti 

Injicit  et  saJjLii  supra  venabula  fertur ; 

Haud  aliter  juvenis  medios  moriturus  in  bostes 

Irruit  et,  qua  tela  videt  densissima,  tendit-  555 

At  pedibus  longe  melior  Lycus  intcr  et  bostes 

Intcr  et  arma  fuga  muros  tcnct,  altaquc  certat 

Prcnderc  tecta  inanu  soaiumque  attingere  dextras. 

Quem  Turnus,  pariter  cursu  tcloque  secutus, 

Increpat  his  victor :  "  Nostrasne  evadere,  demens,        560 

*'  Sperasti  te  posse  manus  ?  "  simul  arripit  ipsum 

Pendcntcm,  et  magna  muri  cum  parte  revellit : 

Quabs  ubi  aut  leporem  aut  candcnti  corpore  cycnum 

Sustulit  alta  j)etens  pedibus  Jovis  armigcr  uncis, 

Quaesitum  aut  matri  multis  balatibus  agnum  565 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    IX.  211 

Martius  a  stabulis  rapuit  lupus.     Undique  clamor 

Tollitur.     Invadunt  et  fossas  aggere  complent ; 

Ardentes  taedas  alii  ad  fastigia  jactant. 

Ilioneus  saxo  atque  ingenti  fragmine  montis 

Lucetium  portae  subeuntem  ignesque  ferentem,  570 

Emathiona  Liger,  Corynaeum  sternit  Asylas, 

Hic  jaculo  bonus,  hic  longe  fallente  sagitta ; 

Ortygium  Caeneus,  victorem  Caenea  Turnus, 

Turnus  Itym  Cloniumque,  Dioxippum  Promolumque, 

Et  Sagarim  et  summis  stantem  pro  turribus  Idan,        575 

Privernum  Capys.     Hunc  primo  levis  basta  Themillae 

Strinxerat ;  ille  manum  projecto  tegmine  demens 

Ad  vulnus  tulit :  ergo  alis  allapsa  sagitta 

Et  laevo  infixa  est  lateri  manus,  abditaque  intus 

Spiramenta  animae  letali  vulnere  rupit.  580 

Stabat  in  egregiis  Arcentis  filius  armis, 

Pictus  acu  cblamydem  et  fcrrugine  clarus  Hibera, 

Insignis  facie,  genitor  quem  miserat  Arcens 

Eductum  matris  luco  Symaetbia  circum 

Flumina,  pinguis  ubi  et  placabilis  ara  Palici :  585 

Stridentem  fundam  positis  Mezentius  hastis 

Ipse  ter  adducta  circum  caput  egit  habena, 

Et  media  adversi  liquefacto  tempora  plumbo 

Dijffidit,  ac  multa  porrectum  extendit  arena. 

Tum  primum  bello  celercm  intendisse  sagittam  590 

Dicitur,  ante  feras  solitus  terrere  fugaces, 

Ascanius,  fortemque  manu  fudisse  Numanum, 

Cui  Kemulo  cognomen  erat,  Turniquo  minorem 

Germanam  nuper  thalamo  sociatus  habebat. 

Is  primam  ante  aciem  digna  atque  indigna  relatu         505 

Vociferans,  tumidusque  novo  praecordia  regno 

Ibat  et  ingentem  sese  clamore  ferebat : 

"  Non  pudet  obsidione  iterum  yalloque  teneri, 

"  Bis  capti  Phryges,  et  morti  praetendere  muros  ? 


212  AENEIDOS   LIB.    IX. 

"  En,  qiii  nostra  sibi  bello  connubia  poscunt  \^  600 

"  Quis  cleus  Italiam,  quac  vos  dementia  adegit  ? 
"  Non  bic  Atridae,  ncc  fandi  fictor  Ulixes. 
"  Durum  ab  stirpe  genus  natos  ad  flumina  primum 
"  Deferimus,  sacvoque  gelu  duramus  et  undis; 
• "  Venatu  invigilant  pucri  silvasque  fatigant ;  605 

"|Flecterc  ludus  cquos  et  spicula  tendere  cornu  ;\ 
"  At  patiens  operum  parvoquo  assueta  juventus    ^ 
"  Aut  rastris  terram  domat,  aut  quatit  oppida  bello. 
"  Omne  aevum  ferro  teritur,  versaque  juvencum 
"  Terga  fatigamus  hasta,  nec  tarda  scnectus  610 

"  Debilitat  vires  animi  mutatque  vigorem. 
"  Canitiem  galea  premimus,  semperque  recentes 
"  Comportare  juvat  praedas  ct  vivere  rapto. 
"  Vobis  picta  croco  et  fulgenti  murice  vestis, 
"  Desidiac  cordi ;  juvat  indulgere  choreis,  615 

"  Et  tunicae  manicas  et  habent  redimicula  mitrae. 
"  0  vere  Phrj^giac,  neque  enim  Phrygcs,  ite  pcr  alta 
"  Dindyma,  ubi  assuetis  biforem  dat  tibia  cantum. 
"  Tympana  vos  buxusque  vocat  Berecyntia  Matris 
"  Idaeae  :  sinite  arma  viris,  et  cedite  ferro  !  "  620 

Talia  jactantem  dictis  ac  dira  caneutem 
Non  tulit  Ascanius,  nervoque  obversus  equino 
Contendit  telum,  diversaque  l)rachia  ducens 
Constitit,  ante  Jovem  supplex  pin*  vota  precatus  : 
"  Jupiter  omnipotens,  audacibus  annue  coeptis  :  625 

"  Ipse  tibi  ad  tua  templa  feram  solcmnia  dona, 
"  Et  statuam  ante  aras  aurata  fronte  juvencum, 
"  Candcntem,  pariterque  caput  cum  matrc  fereutem, 
"  Jam  cornu  petat  et  pedibus  qui  spargat  arenam." 
Audiit  et  coeli  genitor  de  parte  serena  630 

Intonuit  laevum  :  sonat  uua  fatifer  arcus. 
Efifugit  horrendum  stridens  adducta  sagitta, 
Perque  caput  Remuli  vcnit  ct  cava  tempora  ferro 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    IX.  213 

Trcajicit.     "  I,  verbis  virtutem  illiicle  sup.orbis  ! 

"  Bis  capti  Phryges  haec  Rutulis  responsa  remittuiit."  635 

Hoc  tantum  Ascanius  ;  Teucri  clamore  sequuntur, 

Laetitiaque  frcmunt  animosque  ad  sidera  lollunt. 

Aetheria  tum  forte  plaga  crinitus  Apollo 

Desuper  Ausonias  acies  urbemque  videbat, 

Nube  sedens,  atque  his  victorem  affatur  lulum  :  G4() 

"  Macte  nova  virtute,  puer  :  sic  itur  ad  astra, 

'■  Dis  genite  et  geniture  deos.     Jure  omnia  bella 

"  Gente  sub  Assaraci  fato  ventura  resident, 

"  Nec  te  Troja  capit."     Simiil  haec  effatus  ab  alto 

Aethere  se  mittit,  spirantes  dimovet  auras,  645 

Ascaniumque  petit ;  formam  tum  vertitur  oris 

Antiquum  in  Buten.     Hic  Dardanio  Anchisae 

Armiger  ante  fuit  fidusque  ad  hmina  custos, 

Tum  comitem  Ascanio  pater  addidit.     Ibat  Apollo 

Omnia  longaevo  similis,  vocemque  coloremque  650 

Et  crines  albos  et  saeva  sonoribus  arma ; 

Atque  his  ardentem  dictis  affatur  lulum  : 

"  Sit  satis,  Aenide,  telis  impune  Numanum 

"  Oppetiisse  tuis  :  primam  hanc  tibi  magnus  ApoUo 

"  Concedit  laudem,  et  paribus  non  invidet  armis  ;         655 

"  Cetera  parce,  puer^  beUo."     Sic  orsus  Apollo 

Mortales  medio  adspectus  sermone  reliquit, 

Et  proculin  tenuem  ex  oculis  evanuit  auram. 

Agnovere  deum  proceres  divinaque  tela 

Dardanidae,  pharetramque  fuga  sensere  sonantem.        660 

Ergo  avidum  pugnae  dictis  ac  numine  Phoebi 

Ascanium  prohibent,  ipsi  in  certamina  rursus 

Succedunt  animasque  in  aperta  pericula  mittunt. 

It  clamor  totis  per  proj)ugnacuIa  muris ; 

Intendunt  acres  arcus,  amentaque  torquent.  665 

Sternitur  omne  solum  telis  ;  tum  scuta  cavaeque 

Dant  sonitum  flictu  galeae :  pugna  aspera  surgit, 


<». 


214  AENEIDOS    LIB.    IX. 

Quantus  ab  occasu  vcniens  pluvialibus  Haedis 
Verberat  iraber  bumum,  quam  multa  grandine  nimbi 
In  vada  praecipitant,  quum  Jupiter  horridus  Austris   670 
Torquet  aquosam  biemem  et  coelo  cava  nubila  rumpit. 

Pandarus  et  Bitias,  Idaeo  Alcanore  creti, 
Quos  Jovis  eduxit  luco  silvestris  lacra 
Abietibus  juvcnes  patriis  et  montibus  acquos, 
Portam,  quae  ducis  imperio  commissa,  recludunt,         675 
Freti  armis,  ultroque  invitant  moenibus  hostem. 
Ipsi  intus  dextra  ac  laeva  pro  turribus  adstant, 
Armati  ferro  et  cristis  capita  alta  corusci, 
Quales  aeriae  liquentia  flumina  circum, 
Sive  Padi  ripis,  Athesim  seu  propter  amoenum,  680 

Consurgunt  geminae  quercus,  intonsaque  coclo 
Attollunt  capita  et  sublimi  vertice  nutant. 
Irrumpunt,  aditus  Rutuli  ut  videre  patentes. 
Continuo  Quercens  et  pulcher  Aquicolus  armis 
Et  praeceps  animi  Tmarus  et  Mavortius  Haemon         685 
Agminibus  totis  aut  versi  terga  dedere, 
Aut  ipso  portae  posuere  in  limine  vitam. 
Tum  magis  increscunt  animis  discordibus  irae, 
Et  jam  coUecti  Troes  glomcrantur  eodem, 
Et  conferre  manum  et  procurrere  longius  audent.  690 

Ductori  Turno,  diversa  in  parte  furcnti 
Turbantique  viros,  pcrfertur  nuntius,  hostem 
Fervere  caede  nova  et  portas  praebcre  patentes. 
Dcscrit  inccptum  atque  immani  concitus  ira 
Dardaniam  ruit  ad  portam  fratresque  supcrbos.  61)5 

Et  primum  Antiphatcn,  is  enim  se  primus  ajeliat, 
Thebana  de  matre  nothum  Sarpedonis  alti, 
Conjecto  stcrnit  jaculo :  volat  Itala  cornus 
Aera  pcr  tcnerum,  stomachoque  inlisa  sub  altum 
Pectus  abit ;  reddit  specus  atri  vulneris  undam  700 

Spumantem,  ct  fixo  fcrrum  in  puhnone  tcpcscit. 


AENEIDOS    L1I5.    IX.  215 

Tum  Meropem  atque  Eryraanta  manu,  tum  sternit  Apliid- 
Tum  Bitian  ardentem  oculis  animisque  frementem,  [num  ; 
Non  jaculo-neque  enim  jaculo  vitam  ille  dedisset-, 
Sed  magnum  stridens-contorta  plialarica  venit,  705 

Fulminis  acta  modo,  quam  nec  duo  taurea  terga, 
Nec  duplici  squama  lorica  fidelis  et  auro 
Sustinuit :  collapsa  ruunt  immania  membra. 
Dat  tellus  gemitum,  et  clipeum  super  intonat  ingens. 
/  Talis  in  Euboico  Baiarum  litore  quondam  710 

\Saxea  pila  cadit,  magnis  quam  molibus  ante 
IConstructam  ponto  jaciunt ;  sic  illa  ruinam 
Prona  trahit,  penitusque  vadis  illisa  recumbit ; 
Miscent  se  maria  et  nigrae  attolluntur  arenae  ; 
Tum  sonitu  Prochyta  alta  tremit,  durumque  cubile      715 
Inarime  Jovis  imperiis  imposta  Typboeo. 

Hic  Mars  armij)otens  animum  viresque  Latinis 
Addidit,  et  stimulos  acres  sub  pectore  vertit, 
Immisitque  fugam  Teucris  atrumque  timorem. 
Undique  conveniunt,  quoniam  data  copia  pugnae,        720 
Bellatorque  animo  deus  incidit. 
Pandarus  ut  fuso  germanum  corpore  cernit, 
Et  quo  sit  fortuna  loco,  qui  casus  agat  res ; 
Portam  vi  multa  converso  cardine  torquet, 
Obnixus  latis  bumeris,  multosque  suorum  725 

Moenibus  exclusos  duro  in  certamine  linquit ; 
Ast  alios  secum  includit  recipitque  ruentes, 
Demens,  qui  Rutulum  in  medio  non  agmine  regem 
Viderit  irrumpentem,  ultroque  incluserit  urbi, 
Immanein  veluti  pecora  inter  inertia  tigrim.  730 

Continuo  nova  lux  oculis  efifulsit,  et  arma 
Horrendum  sonuere ;  tremunt  in  vertice  cristae 
Sanguineae,  clipeoque  micantia  fulmina  mittit. 
Agnoscunt  faciem  invisam  atque  immania  membra 
Turbati  subito  Aeneadae.     Tum  Pandarus  ingens        735 


216  AENEIDOS   LIB.    IX. 

Einicat,  et  mortis  fraternae  fervidus  ira 

Effatur :  ''  Non  baec  dotalis  regia  Amatae, 

'''  Nec  muris  coliibet  patriis  media  Ardea  Turnum ; 

"  Castra  inimica  vides  ;  nulla  Linc  exire  potestas." 

Olli  subridens  sedato  pcctore  Turnus :  740 

"  Incipe,  si  qua  animo  virtus,  et  consere  dextram  : 

"  Hic  etiam  inventum  Priamo  narrabis  Acbillen." 

Dixerat ;  ille  rudem  nodis  et  cortice  crudo 

Intorquet  summis  adnixus  viribus  bastam. 

Excepere  aurae  :  vulnus  Saturnia  Juno  745 

Detorsit  veniens  portaeque  infigitur  basta. 

"  At  non  boc  telum,  mea  quod  vi  dextera  versat, 

"  Effugies  :  neque  enim  is  teli  nec  vulneris  auctor." 

Sic  ait,  et  sublatum  alte  consurgit  in  ensem,  • 

Et  mediam  ferro  gemina  inter  tempora  frontem  750 

Dividit  impubesque  immani  vulnere  maLas. 

Fit  sonus :  ingenti  concussa  est  pondere  tellus. 

ColLapsos  artus  atque  arma  cruenta  cerebro 

Sternit  bumi  moriens,  atque  illi  partibus  aequis 

Huc  caput  atque  ilkic  humero  cx  utroque  pependit,     755 

Difiugiunt  versi  trepida  farmidinc  Trocs  : 

Et  si  continuo  victorem  ea  cura  subisset, 

Rumpere  claustra  manu  sociosque  immittere  portis, 

Ultimus  ille  dies  bello  gentique  fuisset.  i 

Sed  furor  ardentem  caedisque  insana  cupido  760 

Ecrit  in  adversos. 

Princij)io  Pbalcrim  et  succiso  poplite  Grygen 

Excipit,  liinc  raptas  fugientibus  ingerit  bastas 

In  tergum  :  Juno  vires  animumque  ministrat. 

Addit  Halym  comitem  et  confixa  Pbcgea  parma,  765 

Ignaros  deinde  in  muris  Martemque  cientes 

Alcandrumque  Haliumque  Noemonaque  Prytanimque. 

Lyncea  tendentcm  contra  sociosque  vocantem 

Vibranti  gladio  connixus  ab  aggerc  dexter 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    IX.  217 

Occupat :  liuic  uno  dejectum  commmus  ictu  770 

Cum  galea  longe  jacuit  caimt.     Inde  ferarum 

Vastatorem  Amycum,  quo  non  felicior  alter 

Unguere  tela  manu  ferrumque  armare  veneno, 

Et  Clytium  Aeoliden,  et  amicum  Crethea  Musis, 

CTethea  Musarum  comitem,  cui  carmina  semper  775 

Et  citharae  cordi,  numerosque  intendere  nervis  • 

Semper  equos  atque  arma  virum  pugnasque  canebat. 

Tandem  ductores  audita  caede  suorum 

Conveniunt  Teucri,  Mnestheus  acerque  Sercstus, 

Palantesque  vident  socios  hostemque  receptum.  780 

Et  Muestheus  "  Quo  deinde  fugam,  quo  tenditis  ?  "  iuquit. 

"  Quos  alios  muros,  quae  jam  ultra  moenia  habetis  ? 

"  Unus  homo,  et  vestris,  o  cives,  undique  septus 

"  Aggeribus,  tantas  strages  impune  per  urbem 

"  Ediderit  ?  juvenum  primos  tot  miserit  Orco  ?  785 

"  Non  infelicis  patriae  veterumque  deorum 

"  Et  magni  Aeneae  segnes  miseretque  pudetque  ?  " 

Talibus  accensi  firmantur,  et  agmine  denso 

Consistunt.     Turnus  paulktim  excedere  pugna, 

Et  fluvium  petere  ac  partem,  quae  cingitiir  unda.         790 

Acrius  hoc  Teucri  clamore  incumbere  magno 

Et  glomerare  manum  :  ceu  saevum  turba  leonem 

Quum  telis  premit  infensis,  at  territus  ille, 

Asper,  acerba  tuens,  retro  redit,  et  neque  terga 

Ira  dare  aut  virtus  patitur,  nec  tendere  contra  795 

Ille  quidem,  hoc  cupiens,  potis  est  per  tela  virosque. 

Haud  aliter  retro  dubius  vestigia  Turnus 

Improperata  refert,  et  mens  exaestuat  ira. 

Quin  etiam  bis  tum  medios  invaserat  hostes 

Bis  confusa  fuga  per  muros  agmina  vertit ;  800 

Sed  manus  e  castris  propere  coit  omnis  in  unum  • 

Nec  contra  vires  audet  Saturnia  Juno 

Sufficere:  aeriam  coelo  nam  Jupiter  Irim 
10 


218  AENEIDOS    LIB.    IX.  •  / 

Demisit,  germanae  baud  molli,a  jussa  ferentem, 

Ni  Turnus  cedat  Teucrorum  moenibus  altis.  805 

Ergo  ncc  clipeo  juvenis  subsistere  tantum, 

Nec  dextra  valet :  injectis  sic  undique  telis 

Obruitur.     Strepit  assiduo  cava  tempora  circum 

Tinnitu  galea,  et  saxis  solida  aera  fatiscunt, 

Discussaeque  jubae  capiti,  ncc  sufficit  umbo  810 

Ictibus ;  ingeminant  hastis  et  Troes  et  ipse 

Fulmineus  Mnestheus.     Tum  toto  corpore  sudor 

Liquitur  et  piceum  -  nec  respirare  potestas  - 

Flumen  agit ;  fessos  quatit  aeger  anbelitus  artus. 

Tum  demum  praeceps  saltu  sese  omnibus  armis  815 

In  fluvium  dedit.     lUe  suo  cum  gurgite  flavo 

Accepit  venientem  ac  moUibus  extulit  undig, 

Et  laetum  sociis  abluta  caede  remisit. 


P.  VIRGILII  MARO^flS 

AENEIDOS 

LIBER  DECIMUS. 


Panditur  interea  domus  omnipotentis  Olymjai, 

Conciliumque  vocat  diviim  pater  atque  hominum  rex 

Sideream  in  sedem,  terras  unde  arduus  omnes 

Castraque  Dardanidum  adspectat  populosque  Latinos. 

Considunt  tectis  bipatentibus  ;  incipit  ipse :  5 

"  Coelicolae  magni,  quianam  sententia  vobis 

"  Versa  retro,  tantumque  animis  certatis  iniquis  ? 

"  Abnueram  bello  Italiam  concurrere  Teucris. 

"  Quae  contra  vetitum  discordia  ?  quis  metus  aut  hos 

"  Aut  hos  arma  sequi  femimque  lacessere  suasit  ?  10 

^'  Adveniet  justum  pugnae,  ne  arcessite,  tempus, 

"  Quum  fera  Carthago  Eomanis  arcibus  olim 

''  Exitium  magnum  atque  Alpes  immittet  apertas. 

"  Tum  certare  odiis,  tum  res  rapuisse  licebit ; 

"Nunc  sinite,  et  jDlacitum  laeti  componite  foedus."        15 

Jupiter  haec  paucis ;  at  non  Venus  aurea  contra 

Pauca  refert : 

"  0  pater,  o  hominum  rerumque  aeterna  potestas,  - 

''  Namque  aliud  quid  sit,  quod  jam  implorare  queamns  ? — 

"  Cernis,  ut  insultent  Eutuli,  Turnusque  feratur  20 

"  Per  mcdios  insignis  cquis  tumidusque  sccundo 


220  AENEIDOS    LIB.    X. 

"  Marte  mat  ?     Non  clausa  tegunt  jam  moenia  Teucros. 

"  Quin  intra  portas  atque  ipsis  proelia  misccnt 

"  Aggeribus  murorum,  et  inundant  sanguine  fossae. 

''  Aencas  ignarus  abest.     JSTumquamne  lcvari  25 

"  Obsiclione  sines  ?     Muris  iterum  imminet  hostis 

"  Nascentis  Trojae,  nec  non  excrcitus  alter, 

■'  Atque  itcrum  in  Teucros  Aetolis  surgit  ab  Arpis 

"  Tydidcs.     Equidem  credo,  mea  vulnera  rcstant, 

"  Et  tua  progcnies  mortalia  demoror  arma  !  30 

"  Si  sine  pace  tua  atque  invito  numinc  Troes 

'' Italiam  petiere  :  luant  jieccata,  neque  illos 

"  Juveris  auxilio  ;  sin  tot  responsa  secuti 

"  Quae  superi  manesque  dabant :  cur  nunc  tua  quisquam 

"  Vertere  jussa  potest,  aut  cur  nova  condere  fata  ?         35 

"  Quid  repetam  exustas  Erycino  in  litore  classes  '^ 

"  Quid  tempestatum  regem  ventosque  furentes 

"  Acolia  excitos,  aut  actam  nubibus  Irim  ? 

"  Nunc  ctiam  Manes-haec  intentata  manebat 

"  Sors  rerum-movet,  et  superis  immissa  repente  40 

"  Allecto  medias  Italum  bacchata  per  urbes. 

"  Nil  super  imperio  moveor :  spcravimus  ista, 

"  Dum  fortuna  fuit ;  vincant,  quos  vincere  mavis. 

"  Si  nulla  est  regio,  Teucris  quam  det  tua  conjux 

"  Dura  ;  per  eversae,  gcnitor,  fumantia  Trojae  45 

"  Excidia  obtestor,  liceat  dimittcre  ab  armis 

"  Incohmiem  Ascanium,  hceat  superessc  nepotem. 

"  Aeneas  sane  ignotis  jactetur  in  undis 

"  Et,  quamcumque  viam  dedcrit  fortuna,  sequatur  ; 

"  Hunc  tcgerc  et  dirae  valeam  subduccrc  pugnae.  50 

"  Est  Amathus,  est  celsa  mihi  Paphus  atque  Cythera, 

"  Idahaeque  domns :  positis  inglorius  armis 

"  Exigat  hic  aevum.     Magna  dicione  jubeto 

"  Carthago  premat  Ausoniam  :  nihil  urbibus  indc 

'■  Obstabit  Tyriis.     Quid  pcstcm  cvadcre  belli  55 


AENEID03    LIB,    X.  221 

"  Juvit  et  Argolicos  modium  fjigisse  per  ignes, 

"  Totque  maris  vastaeque  exiiausta  pericula  terrae, 

'*  Dum  Latium  Teucri  recidivaque  Pergama  quaerunt  ? 

"  Non  satius,  cineres  patriae  insedisse  supremos 

"  Atque  solum,  quo  Troja  fuit  ?  Xanthum  et  Simoentu  GO 

"  Redde,  oro,  miseris,  iterumque  revolvere  casus 

"  Da,  pater,  Iliacos  Teucris."     Tum  regia  Juno, 

Acta  furore  gravi :   ''  Quid  me  alta  silentia  cogis 

*'  Rnmporc  et  obductum  verbis  vulgare  dolorera  ? 

''  Aenean  liominum  quisquam  divumque  subegit  G5 

"  Bella  sequi,  aut  hostem  regi  se  inferre  Latino  ? — 

"  Italiara  petiit  fatis  auctoribus :  esto  ; 

"  Cassandrae  impulsus  furiis  :  num  linquere  castra 

"  Hortati  sumus,  aut  vitam  committere  ventis  ? 

"  Num  puero  summam  belli,  num  credere  muros,  70 

"  Tyrrhenamque  fidem  aut  gentes  agitare  quietas  ? 

"  Quis  deus  in  fraudem,  quae  dura  potentia  nostri 

"  Egit  ?  ubi  hic  Juno,demissave  nubibus  Iris  ? — 

'■  Indignum  est,  Italos  Trojam  circumdare  flamrais 

"  Nascentem,  et  patria  Turnura  consistere  terra,  75 

''  Cui  Pilumnus  avus,  cui  diva  Veniha  mater  : 

"  Quid,  face  Trojanos  atra  vim  ferre  Latinis, 

"  Arva  aliena  jugo  premere  atque  avertere  praedas  ? 

"  Quid,  soceros  legere  et  gremiis  abducere  pactas  ; 

"  Pac-cra  orare  manu,  praefigere  puppibus  arma  ? —       80 

"  Tu  potes  Aenean  manibus  subducere  Graium, 

"  Proque  viro  nebulam  et  ventos  obtendere  inanes, 

"  Et  potes  in  totidem  classem  convertere  nymphas  ; 

'•'  Nos  aliquid  Eutulos  contra  juvisse,  nefandum  est  ? — 

"  Aeneas  ignarus  abest :  ignarus  et  absit :  85 

"  Est  Paphus  Idaliuraque  tibi,  sunt  alta  Cythera. 

"  Quid  gravidam  bellis  urbem  et  corda  aspera  tentas  ? 

"  Nosne  tibi  fluxas  Phrygiae  res  vertere  fundo 

''  Conamur  ?  nos  ;  an  miseros  qui  Troas  Achivis 


222  AENEIDOS    LIB.    X. 

"  Objecit  ?     Quae  causa  fuit,  consurgere  in  arma  90 

"  Europamque  Asiamque  et  foedera  solvere  furto  ? 
"  Me  duce  Dardanius  Spartam  expugnavit  adulter, 
"  At  ego  tela  dedi,  fovive  cupidine  bella  ? 
"  Tum  decuit  metuisse  tuis  ;  nunc  sera  querelis 
'•  Haiid  justis  assurgis,  et  irrita  jurgia  jactas."  95 

Talibus  orabat  Juno,  cunctique  fremebant 
Coelicolae  assensu  vario  :  ceu  flamina  prima 
Quum  deprensa  fremunt  silvis  et  caeca  volutant 
Murmura,  venturos  nautis  prodentia  ventos. 
Tiim  pater  omnipotens,  rerum  cui  summa  potestas,     100 
Infit  -  eo  dicente  detim  domus  alta  silescit, 
Et  tremefacta  solo  tcllus,  silet  arduus  aetber, 
Tum  Zepbyri  posuere,  premit  placida  aeqiiora  pontus  - 
'  Accipite  ergo  animis  atque  baec  mea  figite  dicta. 
'  Quandoquidem  Ausonios  conjungi  foedera  Teucris     105 
'  Haud  licitum,  nec  vestra  capit  discordia  finem  : 
'  Quae  cuique  est  fortuna  bodie,  quam  quisque  secat  spem, 
'  Tros  Kutulusve  fuat,  nullo  discrimine  habebo, 
'  Seu  fatis  Italum  castra  obsidione  tenentur, 
'  Sive  errore  malo  Trojae  monitisque  sinistris.  110 

'  Nec  Eutulos  solvo.     Sua  cuique  exorsa  laborem 
'  Forfcunamque  ferent,     Rex  Jupiter  omnibus  idem : 
'  Eata  viam  invenient."     Stygii  jier  flumina  fratris, 
Per  pice  torrentes  atraque  voragine  ripas 
Adnuit,  et  totum  nutu  tremefecit  Olymjmm.  115 

Hic  finis  fandi ;  solio  tum  Jupifcer  aureo 
Surgit,  coelicolae  medium  quem  ad  limina  ducunt 
Interea  Rutuli  portis  circum  omnibus  instant 
Sternere  caede  viros,  et  moenia  cingere  flammis. 
At  lcgio  Acneadum  vallis  obscssa  tenctur,  120 

Nec  spcs  ulla  fugae  ;  miscri  stant  turribus  altis 
Nequidquam,  ct  rara  muros  cinxere  corona. 
Asius  Imbrasides  Hicetaoniusque  Thymoetes 


AENEIDOS    LIB,    X.  223 

Assaracique  duo  et  senior  cum  Castore  Tliymbris 

Prima  acies ;  lios  germani  Sarpedonis  ambo  125 

Et  Clarus  et  Tliemon  Lycia  comitantur  ab  alta. 

Fert  ingens  toto  connixus  corpore  saxum, 

Haud  partem  exiguam  moutis,  Lyrnesius  Acmon, 

Nec  Clytio  genitore  minor,  nec  fratre  Menestheo. 

Hi  jaculis,  illi  certant  defendere  saxis,  130 

Molirique  ignem,  nervoque  aptare  sagittas. 

Ipse  inter  medios,  Vcneris  justissima  cura, 

Dardanius  caput,  ecce,  puer  detectus  honestum, 

QuaKs  gemma,  micat,  fulvum  quae  dividit  aurum, 

Aut  coUo  decus  aut  capiti,  vel  quale  per  artem  135 

Inclusum  buxo,  aut  Oricia  terebintbo, 

Lucet  ebur ;  fusos  cervix  cui  lactea  crines 

Accipit  et  moUi  subnectens  circulus  auro. 

Te  quoque  magnanimae  viderunt,  Ismare,  gentes 

Vulnera  dirigere  et  calamos  armare  veneno,  140 

Maeonia  generose  domo.  ubi  pinguia  culta 

Exercentque  viri,  Pactolosque  irrigat  auro. 

Adfuit  et  Mnestheus,  quem  pulsi  pristina  Turni 

Aggere  muroram  sublimem  gloria  tollit,  * 

Et  Capys  :  hinc  nomen  Campanae  ducitur  urbi.  145 

IUi  inter  sese  duri  certamina  belli  ^ 

Contulerant ;  media  Aeneas  freta  nocte  secabat. 
Namque  ut  ab  Evandro  castris  ingressus  Etruscis, 
Kegem  adit  et  regi  memorat  nomenque  genusque, 
Quidve  petat  quidve  ipse  ferat ;  Mezentius  arma  150 

Quae  sibi  conciliet,  violentaque  pectora  Turni 
Edocet ;  humanis  quae  sit  fiducia  rebus 
Admonet  immiscetque  preces.     Haud  fit  mora :  Tarchon 
Jungit  opes,  foedusque  ferit  ;  tum  libera  fati 
Classem  conscendit  jussis  gens  Lydia  divum,  155 

Externo  commissa  duci.     Aeneia  puppis 
Prima  tenet,  rostro  Phrygios  subjuncta  leones  ; 


224  AENEIDOS    LIB,    X. 

Imminet  Ida  super,  profugis  gratissima  Teucris. 

Hic  magnus  sedet  Aeneas,  secumque  volutat 

Eventus  belli  varios  ;  Pallasque  sinistro  160 

Affixus  lateri  jam  quacrit  sidera,  opacae 

Noctis  iter,  jam  quae  passus  terraque  marique. 

Pandite  nunc  Helicona,  deae,  cantusque  movete, 
Quae  manus  interea  Tuscis  comitctur  ab  oris 
Aenean,  armetque  rates,  pelagoque  veliatur,  1G5 

Massicus  aerata  princeps  secat  aequora  Tigri : 
Sul)  quo  mille  manus  juvenum,  qui  moenia  Clusi, 
Quique  urbem  liquere  Cosas ;  quis  tela  sagittae 
Gorytique  leves  humeris  et  letifer  arcus. 
Una  torvus  Abas  :  buic  totum  insignibus  armis  170 

Agmen  et  aurato  fulgebat  ApoUine  puppis. 
Sexcentos  illi  dederat  Populonia  mater  . 
Expertos  belli  juvcnes ;  ast  Ilva  trecentos 
Insula,  inexliaustis  Clialybum  generosa  metallis, 
Tertius,  ille  bominum  divumque  interpres  Asilas,  175 

Cui  pecudum  fibrae,  coeli  cui  sidera  parent 
Et  linguae  volucrum  et  praesagi  fulminis  ignes, 
Mille  rapit  densos  acie  atque  horreutibus  hastis, 
Hos  parere  jubent  Alpbeae  ab  origine  Pisae, 
Urbs  Etrusca  solo.     Sequitur  pulcherrimus  Astur,       180 
Astur  equo  fidens  et  versicoloribus  armis. 
Tercentum  adjiciunt ;  mens  omnibus  una  sequendi, 
Qui  Caerete  domo,  qui  sunt  Minionis  in  arvis, 
Et  Pyrgi  veteres,  intempestaeque  Graviscae. 
Non  ego  te,  Ligurum  ductor  fortitsinie  bello,  185 

Transierim,  Cinyra,  et  paucis  comitate  Cupavo, 
Cujus  olorinae  surgunt  de  vertice  pennae- 
Crimen  amor  vcstruni  -  formaeque  insigiie  patcrnae, 
Namque  fcrunt,  hictu  Cycnum  Phaethontis  amati, 
Populeas  inter  frondes  umbramque  sororum  190 

Dum  canit  ct  maestum  Musa  solatur  amorem, 


AENEIDOS    LI13.    X.  225 

Canentem  moUi  pluma  duxisse  senectam, 

Linquentem  terras  et  sidera  voce  sequentem. 

Filius,  aequales  comitatus  classe  catervas, 

Ingentem  remis  Centaurum  promovet  -  ille  195 

Instat  aquae,  saxumque  undis  immane  minatur 

Arduus  -  et  longa  sulcat  maria  alta  carina. 

Ille  etiam  patriis  agmen  ciet  Ocnus  ab  oris, 

Fatidicae  Mantus  et  Tusci  filius  amnis, 

Qui  muros  matrisque  dedit  tibi,  Mantua,  nomen,  200 

Mantua  dives  avis,  sed  non  genus  omnibus  unum  : 

Gens  illi  triplex,  populi  sub  gente  quaterni ; 

Ipsa  caput  populis  ;  Tusco  de  sanguine  vires. 

Hinc  quoque  quingentos  in  se  Mezentius  arraat, 

Quos  patre  Benaco  velatus  arundine  glauca  205 

Mincius  infesta  ducebat  in  aequora  pinu. 

It  gravis  Aulestes,  centenaque  arbore  fluctum 

Verbcrat  assurgens  :  spumant  vada  marmore  verso. 

Hunc  vehit  immanis  Triton  et  caerula  concha 

Exterrens  freta,  cui  laterum  tenus  liispida  nanti  210 

Frons  bominem  praefert,  in  pristim  desinit  alvus ; 

Spumea  semifero  sub  pectore  murmurat  unda. 

Tot  lecti  proceres  tcr  denis  navibus  ibant 

Subsidio  Trojae,  et  campos  salis  aere  secabant, 

Jamque  dies  coelo  concesserat,  almaque  curru         215 
Noctivago  Phoebe  medium  pulsabat  Olympum  : 
Aeneas  -  neque  enim  membris  dat  cura  quietem  - 
Ipse  sedens  clavumque  regit  velisque  rainistrat. 
Atque  illi  medio  in  spatio  chorus,  eccc,  suarum 
Occurrit  comitum  :  Nymphae,  quas  ahna  Cybebe        220 
Numcn  habere  maris  Nymphasque  e  navibus  esse 
Jusserat,  innabant  pariter  fiuctusque  secabant, 
Quot  prius  aeratae  steterant  ad  litora  prorae. 
Agnoscunt  longe  regem,  lustrantque  choreis. 
Quarum  quae  fandi  doctissima,  Cymodocea  225 


226  AENEIDOS    LIB.    X. 

Pone  seqiiens  dextra  puppim  tenet,  ipsaque  clorso 
Eminet,  ac  laeva  tacitis  subremigat  undis  ; 
Tum  sic  ignarum  alloquitur  :   "  Vigilasnc,  deiim  gens, 
'•'  Aenea  ?     Vigila,  ct  velis  immitte  rudentes.  • 
"  Nos  sumus,  Idaeae  sacro  de  vertice  pinus,  230 

"  Nunc  pelagi  Nympliae,  classis  tua.     Perfidus  ut  nos 
"  Praecipites  ferro  Eutulus  flammaque  premebat  ; 
"  Rupimus  invitae  tua  vincula,  teque  per  aequor 
"  Quaerimus.     Hanc  genetrix  faciem  miserata  refecit, 
"  Et  dedit  esse  deas  aevumque  agitare  sub  undis.        235 
"  At  puer  Ascanius  muro  fossisque  tenetur 
"  Tela  inter  media  atque  borrentes  Marte  Latinos. 
"  Jam  loca  jussa  tenet  forti  permixtus  Etrusco 
"  Arcas  eques  ;  medias  illis  opponere  turmas, 
"  Ne  castris  jungant,  certa  est  sententia  Turno.  240 

"  Surge  age,  et  Aurora  socios  veniente  vocari 
"  Primus  in  arma  jube,  et  clipeum  cape,  quem  dedit  ipse 
"  Invictum  Iguipotens  atque  oras  ambiit  auro. 
"  Crastina  lux,  mea  si  non  irrita  dicta  putaris, 
"  Ingentes  Eutulae  spectabit  caedis  acervos."  245 

Dixerat,  et  dextra  discedens  impulit  altam, 
Haud  ignara  modi,  puppim.     Fugit  illa  per  undas 
Ocior  et  jaculo  et  ventos  aequante  sagitta. 
Inde  aliae  celerant  cursus.     Stupct  inscius  ipse 
Tros  Anchisiades,  animos  tamen  omine  tollit.  250 

Tum  breviter  supera  adspectans  convexa  precatur  : 
"  Ahna  parcns  Idaea  deiim,  cui  Dindyma  cordi 
"  Turrigeraequc  urhes  bijugique  ad  frena  leones, 
"  Tu  mihi  nunc  pugnae  princeps,  tu  rite  propinques 
"  Augurium,  Phrygibusque  adsis  pede,  diva,  secundo."  255 
Tantum  effatus,  ct  interca  revoluta  ruebat 
.  Matura  jam  luce  dies  noctemque  fugarat. 
Principio  sociis  cdicit,  signa  sequantur, 
Atque  animos  aptent  armis,  pugnaeque  parent  se. 


I 

AENEIDOS   LIB.    X.  227 

Jamque  in  conspectu  Teucros  liabet  et  sua  castra,       260 
Stans  celsa  in  pujDpi :  clipeum  quum  deinde  sinistra 
Extulit  ardentem.     Clamorem  ad  sidera  tollunt 
Dardanidae  e  muris :  spes  addita  suscitat  ira^  ; 
Tela  manu  jaciunt :  quales  sub  nubibus  atris 
Strymoniae  dant  signa  grues,  atque  aetbera  tranant    265 
Cum  sonitu,  fugiuntque  Notos  clamore  secundo. 
At  Rutulo  regi  ducibusque  ea  mira  videri 
Ausoniis,  donec  versas  ad  litora  puppes 
Respiciunt,  totumque  allabi  classibus  aequor. 
Ardet  apcx  capiti,  cristisque  a  vertice  flamma  270 

Funditur,  et  vastos  umbo  vomit  aereus  ignes  : 
Non  secus  ac  liquida  si  quando  nocte  cometae 
Sanguinei  lugubre  rubent,  aut  Sirius  ardor, 
Ille  sitim  morbosque  ferens  mortalibus  aegris, 
Nascitur  et  laevo  contristat  lumine  coelum.  275 

Haud  tamen  audaci  Turno  iiducia  cessit 
Litora  praecipere,  et  venientes  pellere  terra. 
[Ultro  animos  tollit  dictis,  atque  increpat  ultro :] 
"  Quod  votis  optastis,  adest,  perfringere  dextra. 
"  In  manibus  Mars  ipse,  viri.     Nunc  conjugis  esto        280 
"  Quisque  suae  tectique  memor;  nunc  magna  referto 
"  Facta,  patrum  laudes.     Ultro  occurramus  ad  undam, 
"  Dum  trepidi  egressique  labant  vestigia  prima. 
"  Audentes  Fortuna  juvat." 

Haec  ait,  et  secum  versat,  quos  ducere  contra,  285 

Vel  quibus  obsessos  i^ossit  concredere  muros. 
Interea  Aeneas  socios  de  puppibus  altis 
Pontibus  exponit.     Multi  servare  recursus 
Languentis  pelagi,  et  brevibus  se  credere  saltu ; 
Per  remos  alii.     Speculatus  litora  Tarchon,  290 

Qua  vada  non  spirant  nec  fracta  remurmurat  unda, 
Sed  mare  inoffensum  crescenti  allabitur  aestu, 
Advcrtit  subito  proras,  sociosque  precatur  : 


228  AENEIDOS    LIU.    X. 

"  Nunc,  0  lecta  raaniis,  valiclis  incumbite  remis ; 

"  ToUite,  ferte  rates ;  iuimicam  findite  rostris  295 

^'  Hanc  terram,  sulcumquc  sibi  premat  ipsa  carina ! 

"  Frangere  qec  tali  puppim  statione  recuso, 

'•  Arrepta  tellure  semel/'     Quae  talia  postquam 

Effatus  Tarclion,  socii  consurgere  tonsis, 

Spumantesque  rates  arvis  inferrc  Latinis,  300 

Donec  rostra  tenent  siccum.     Et  sedere  carinae 

Omnes  innocuae  ;  sed  non  puppis  tua,  Tarcbon. 

NamquG  inflicta  vadis  dorso  dum  pendet  iniquo, 

Anceps  sustentata  diu,  fluctusque  fatigat ; 

Solvitur  atque  viros  mediis  exponit  in  undis,  305 

Fragmina  remorum  quos  et  fluitantia  transtra 

Impediunt,  rctraliitque  pedes  simul  unda  relabens. 

Nec  Turnum  segnis  retinet  mora ;  sed  rapit  acer 

Totam  aciem  in  Teucros,  et  contra  in  litore  sistit. 

Signa  canunt.     Primus  turmas  invasit  agrestes  310 

Aeneas,  omen  pugnae,  stravitque  Latinos, 

Occiso  Thcrone,  virum  qui  maximus  ultro 

Aenean  petit.     Huic  gladio  perque  aerea  suta, 

Per  tunicam  squalentem  auro,  latus  baurit  apertum. 

Inde  Licban  ferit,  exsectum  jam  matre  peremta,  315 

Et  tibi,  Phoebe,  sacrum,  casus  evadere  ferri 

Quod  licuit  parvo.     Nec  longe,  Cissea  durum 

Immanemque  Gyan,  sternentes  agmina  clava, 

Dejecit  lcto :  nihil  illos  Herculis  arma 

Nec  validae  juvere  manus  genitorque  Melampus,  320 

Alcidae  comes,  usque  graves  dum  terra  labores 

Praebuit.     Eccc  Pharo,  voces  dum  jactat  inertes, 

Intorquens  jacuhim  chimanti  sistit  in  ore. 

Tu  quoque,  flavcntcm  prima  hmugine  malas 

Dum  sequeris  Clytium  infelix,  nova  gaudia,  Cydon,     325 

Dardania  stratus  dextra,  securus  amorum, 

Qiii  juvenum  tibi  scmper  crant,  miserande  jacercs  ; 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    X.  229 

Ni  fratrum  stipata  cohors  foret  obvia,  Pliorci 

Progenies,  septem  numero  :  septenaque  tela 

Conjiciunt ;  partim  galea  clipeoque  resultant  330 

Irrita,  defiesit  partim  stringentia  corpus     • 

Alma  Venus.     Fidum  Aeneas  affatur  Acliaten : 

"  Suggere  tela  mibi :  non  ullum  dextera  frustra 

"  Torserit  in  Putulos,  stetcrunt  quae  in  corpore  Graium 

"  Iliacis  campis."     Tum  magnam  corripit  bastam,        335 

Et.jacit :  illa  volans  clipei  transverberat  aera 

Maeouis,  et  tboraca  simul  cum  pcctore  rumpit. 

Huic  frater  subit  Alcanor,  fratremque  ruentem 

Sustentat  dextra :  trajecto  missa  lacerto 

Protinus  basta  fugit  servatque  cruenta  tenorem,  340 

Dexteraque  ex  bumero  nervis  moribunda  pependit 

Tum  Numitor,  jaculo  fratris  de  corpore  rapto, 

Aenean  petiit ;  sed  non  et  figere  contra 

Est  licitum,  magnique  femur  perstrinxit  Acbatae. 

Hic  Curibus,  fidens  primaevo  corpore,  Clausus  345 

Advenit,  et  rigida  Diyopem  ferit  eminus  basta 

Sub  mentum  graviter  pressa,  pariterque  loquentis 

Vocem  animamque  rapit  trajecto  gutture  ;  at  ille 

Fronte  f^rit  terram  et  crassum  vomit  ore  cruorem. 

Tres  quoque  Tbreicios  Boreae  de  gente  suprema,  350 

Et  trcs,  quos  Idas  pater  et  patria  Ismara  mittit, 

Per  varios  sternit  casus.     Accurrit  Halaesus 

Auruncaeque  manus,  subit  et  Neptunia  proles, 

Insignis  Messapus  equis.     Expellere  tendunt 

Nunc  bi,  nunc  ilH  ;  certatur  limine  in  ipso  355 

Ausoniae.     Magno  discordes  aetbere  venti 

Proelia  ceu  tolhint  animis  et  viribus  aequis  ; 

Non  ipsi  inter  se,  non  nubila,  non  mare  cedit ; 

Anceps  pugna  diu;  stant  obnixa  omnia  contra  : 

Haud  aliter  Trojanae  acies  aciesque  Latinae  360 

Concurrunt,  haeret  pede  pes  densusque  \-iro  vir. 


230  AENEIDOS   LIB.    X. 

At  parte  cx  alia,  qua  saxa  rotantia  late 
Impulerat  torrcns  arbustaque  diruta  ripis, 
Arcadas,  insuctos  acies  inferre  pedestres, 
Ut  vidit  Pallas  Latio  dare  terga  sequaci,  365 

Aspera  quis  natura  loci  dimittere  quando 
Suasit  cquos  ;  unum  quod  rebus  restat  egenis, 
Nunc  precc,  nunc  dictis  virtutem  accendit  amaris : 
"  Quo  fugitis,  socii  ?     Per  vos  et  fortia  facta, 
"  Per  ducis  Evandri  nomen  devictaque  bella,  370 

"  Spemque  meam,  patriae  quae  nunc  subit  acmula  laudi, 
^'  Fidite  ne  pedibus,     Ferro  rumpenda  per  hostes 
"  Est  via.     Qua  globus  ille  virum  densissimus  urguet, 
"  Hac  vos  et  Pallanta  ducem  patria  alta  reposcit. 
''  Numina  nulla  prcmunt ;  mortali  urgucmur  ab  lioste  375 
*'  Mortales  ;  totidem  nobis  animacquc  manusque. 
"  Ecce,  maris  magna  claudit  nos  objice  pontus  ; 
'*  Deest  jam  tcrra  fugae  :  pelagus  Trojamne  petemus  ?  " 
Haec  ait  ct  medius  densos  prorumpit  in  hostes. 
Obvius  huic  primum,  fatis  adductus  iniquis,  380 

Fit  Lagus :  hunc,  magno  vcllit  dum  pondere  saxum, 
Intorto  figit  telo,  discrimina  costis 
Per  medium  qua  sj^ina  dabat,  hastamque  receptat 
Ossibus  haerentem.     Quem  non  super  occupat  Hisbo, 
Illc  quidem  hoc  sperans  :   nam  Pallas  ante  rucntem,    385 
Dum  furit,  incautum  crudeli  morte  sodalis, 
Excipit  atque  ensem  tumido  in  pulmone  recondit. 
Hinc  Sthcnclum  pctit,  et  Khoeti  de  gente  vetusta 
Anchcmolum,  thalamos  ausum  incestare  novcrcac. 
Vos  etiam  gemini  Kutulis  cccidistis  in  arvis,  390 

Daucia,  Laridc  Thymberque,  simillima  prolcs, 
Indiscreta  suis,  giatusquc  parcntibus  error  ; 
At  nunc  dura  dedit  vobis  disciiiuina  PaUas  : 
Nam  tibi,  Thymbre,  caput  Evandrius  abstulit  ensis  ; 
Te  decisa  suum,  Larido,  dextera  quaerit,  395 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    X.  231 

Semianimesque  micant  digiti  ferrumque  retractant. 

Arcadas  accensos  monitu  et  praeclara  tuentes 

Facta  viri  mixtus  dolor  et  pudor  armat  in  hostes. 

Tum  Pallas  bijugis  fugientem  Rhoetea  praeter 

Trajicit.     Hoc  spatium,  tantumque  morae  fuit  Ilo :     400 

Ilo  namque  j^rocul  validam  direxerat  hastam, 

Quam  medius  Ehoeteus  intercipit,  optimc  Teuthra, 

Te  fugiens  fratremque  Tyren ;   curruque  volutus 

Caedit  semianimis  Rutulorum  calcibus  arva. 

Ac  velut,  optato  ventis  aestate  coortis,  405 

Dispersa  immittit  silvis  incendia  pastor  ; 

Correptis  subito  mediis,  extenditur  una 

Horrida  per  latos  acies  Vulcania  campos  ; 

Ille  sedens  victor  flammas  despectat  ovantes  : 

Non  aliter  socium  virtus  coit  omnis  in  unum,  410 

Teque  juvat,  Palla.     Sed  bellis  acer  Halaesus 

Tendit  in  adversos,  seque  in  sua  coUigit  arma. 

Hic  mactat  Ladona  Pheretaque  Demodocumque ; 

Strymonio  dextram  fulgenti  deripit  ense 

Elatam  in  juguhim  ;  saxo  ferit  ora  Thoantis,  415 

Ossaque  dispersit  cerebro  permixta  cruento. 

Fata  canens  silvis  genitor  celarat  Halaesum, 

Ut  senior  leto  canentia  lumina  solvit : 

Injecere  manum  Parcae  telisque  sacrarunt 

Evandri.     Quem  sic  Pallas  petit  ante  precatus  :  420 

"  Da  nunc,  Thybri  pater,  ferro,  quod  missile  libro, 

"  Fortunam  atque  viam  duri  per  pectus  Halaesi. 

"  Haec  arma  exuviasque  viri  tua  quercus  habebit." 

Audiit  illa  deus :  dum  texit  Imaona  Halaesus, 

Arcadio  infehx  telo  dat  pcctus  inermum.  425 

At  non  caede  viri  tanta  perterrita  Lausus, 

Pars  iugens  belli,  sinit  agmina :  primus  Abantem 

Oppositum  interimit,  pugnae  nodumque  moramque. 

Sternitur  Arcadiae  proles,  sternuntur  Etrusci, 


232  AENEIDOS    LIB.    X. 

Et  vus,  0  Graiis  imperdita  corpora,  Teiicri.  430 

Agmina  concurrimt  ducibusque  et  viribus  aec[uis  ; 
Extrcmi  addensent  acieS;,  nec  turba  moveri 
Tela  manusque  sinit.     Hinc  Pallas  instat  et  urguet, 
Hinc  contra  Lausus ;  iiec  multum  discrepat  aetas ; 
Egregii  forma,  sed  quis  fortuna  negarat  435 

In  patriam  reditus.    .Ipsos  concurrere  passus 
Haud  tamen  inter  se  magni  regnator  Olympi : 
Mox  illos  sua  fata  manent  majore  sub  hoste. 

Interea  soror  alma  monet  succedere  Lauso 
Turnum  :  qui  volucri  curru  medium  secat  agmen.        440 
Ut  vidit  socios  :  "  Tempus  desistcre  pugnae  : 
"  Solus  ego  in  Pallanta  feror,  soli  mihi  Pallas 
"  Debetur  ;  cuperem  ipse  parens  spectator  adesset." 
Haec  ait,  et  socii  ccsserunt  aequore  jusso. 
At,  Kutulum  abscessu,  juvenis  tum,  jussa  superba       445 
Miratus,  stupet  in  Turno,  corpusque  per  ingens 
Lumina  volvit,  obitque  truci  procul  omnia  visu, 
Talibus  et  dictis  it  contra  dicta  tyranni : 
''  Aut  spohis  ego  jam  raptis  laudabor  opimis, 
"  Aut  leto  insigni ;  sorti  pater  aequus  utrique  est.       450 
"  Tolle  minas."     Fatus  medium  proccdit  in  aequor. 
Frigidus  Arcadibus  coit  in  praccordia  sanguis. 
Desiluit  Turnus  bijugis  :  pedes  apparat  ire 
Comminus.     Utque  leo,  specula  quum  vidit  ab  alta 
Stare  procul  campis  meditantem  in  proclia  taurum,      455 
Advolat  :  haud  alia  est  Turni  vcnientis  imago. 
Hunc  ubi  contiguum  missac  forc  credidit  hastae, 
Ire  prior  PaHas,  si  qua  fors  adjuvct  ausum 
Viribus  imparibus,  inagnumque  ita  ad  aethera  fatur  : 
"  Per  patris  hospitium  et  mensas,  quas  advena  adisti,  460 
"  Te  precor,  Alcide,  coeptis  ingentibus  adsis ! 
"  Cernat  semineci  sibi  me  raperc  arma  cruenta, 
"  Victoremque  ferant  moricntia  lumina  Turni." 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    X.  233 

Audiit  Alcides  juvenem,  magnumque  sub  imo 

Corde  premit  gemitum,  lacrimasque  efFundit  inanes.    465 

Tum  genitor  natum  dictis  aifatur  amicis : 

"  Stat  sua  cuique  dies;  breve  et  irreparabile  tempus 

"  Omnibus  est  vitae ;  sed  famam  extendere  factis, 

"  Hoc  virtutis  opus.     Trojae  sub  moenibus  altis 

"  Tot  nati  cecidere  deum  ;  quin  occidit  ima  470 

"  Sarpedon,  mea  progenies.     Etiam  sua  Turuum 

''  Fata  vocant,  metasque  dati  pervenit  ad  aevi." 

Sic  ait,  atque  oculos  Kutulorum  rejicit  arvis. 

At  Pallas  magnis  emittit  viribus  hastam, 

Vaginaque  cava  fulgentem  deripit  ensem.  475 

Illa  volans,  humeri  surgunt  qua  tegmina  summa, 

Incidit,  atque,  viam  clipei  molita  per  oras, 

Tandem  etiam  magno  strinxit  de  corpore  Turni. 

Hic  Turnus  ferro  praefixum  robur  acuto 

In  Pallanta  diu  librans  jacit,  atque  ita  fatur  :  480 

"  Adspice,  num  mage  sit  nostrum  penetrabile  telum." 

Dixerat ;  at  clipeum,  tot  ferri  terga,  tot  aeris,    * 

Quum  pellis  toties  obeat  circumdata  tauri, 

Yibranti  medium  cuspis  transverberat  ictu, 

Loricaeque  moras  et  pectus  perforat  ingens.  485 

Ille  rapit  calidum  frustra  de  vulnere  telum  : 

Una  eademque  via  sanguis  animusque  sequuntur. 

Corruit  in  vubius  ;  sonitum  super  arma  dedere  ; 

Et  terram  bostilem  moriens  petit  ore  cruento. 

Quem  Turnus  super  adsistens,  490 

"  Arcades,  haec  "  inquit  "  memores  mea  dicta  referte 

"  Evandro  :  Qualem  meruit,  Pallanta  remitto. 

"  Quisquis  honos  tumuli,  quidquid  solameu  humandi  est, 

"  Largior.     Haud  illi  stabunt  Aeneia  parvo 

"  Hospitia."     Et  laevo  pressit  pede,  talia  fatus,  495 

Exanimem,  rapiens  immania  pondera  baltei, 

Impressumque  nefas :  una  sub  nocte  jugali 


234  AENEIDOS    LIB.    X. 

Caesa  manus  juvenum  foede,  thalamique  cruenti ; 

Quae  Clonus  Euiytides  multo  caelaverat  auro. 

Quo  nunc  Turnus  ovat  spolio  gaudetque  potitus.  500 

Nescia  mens  liominum  fati  sortisque  futurae, 

Et  servare  modum,  rebus  sublata  secundis  ! 

Turno  tempus  erit,  magno  quum  optaverit  emtum 

Intactum  Pallanta,  et  quum  spolia  ista  diemque 

Oderit.     At  socii  multo  gemitu  lacrimisque  505 

Impositum  scuto  referunt  Pallanta  frequentes. 

0  dolor  atque  decus  magnum  rediture  parenti ! 

Haec  te  prima  dies  bello  dedit,  haec  eadem  aufert, 

Quum  tamen  ingentes  Rutulorum  linquis  acervos  ! 

Nec  jam  fama  mali  tanti,  sed  certior  auctor  510 

Advolat  Aeneae,  tenui  discrimine  leti 
Esse  suos  :  tempus,  versis  succurrere  Teucris. 
Proxima  quaeque  metit  gladio,  latumque  j)er  agmeii 
Ardens  limitem  agit  ferro,  te,  Turne,  superbum 
Cacde  nova  quaerens.     Pallas,  Evander,  in  ipsis  515 

Omnia  sifnt  oculis,  mensae,  quas  advena  primas 
Tunc  adiit,  dextraeque  datae.     Sulmone  creatos 
Quatuor  hic  juvenes,  totidem,  quos  educat  Ufens, 
Viventes  rapit,  inferias  quos  immolet  umbris, 
Captivoque  rogi  perfuudat  sanguine  flammas.  520 

Indc  Mago  procul  infensam  contenderat  hastam ; 
Ille  astu  subit;  attremebunda  supervolat  hasta  ; 
Et  genua  amplectens  effatur  talia  supplex: 
"  Per  patrios  Manes  et  spes  surgentis  luli, 
•'*  Te  precor,  hanc  animam  serves  gnatoque  patrique.  525 
"  Est  domus  alta  ;  jacent  penitus  defossa  talenta 
"  Caelati  argenti ;  sunt  auri  pondera  facti 
"Infectique  mihi.     Non  hic  victoria  Teucrum 
"  Vertitur,  aut  anima  una  dabit  discrimina  tanta." 
Dixerat ;  Aeneas  contra  cui  talia  reddit :  530 

•'  Argenti  atquc  auri  memoras  quac  multa  talenta, 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    X.  235 

"  Gnatis  parce  tuis :  belK  commercia  Turnus 

"  Sustulit  ista  prior  jam  tum  Pallante  peremto. 

"  Hoc  patris  Anchisae  Manes.  lioc  sentit  lulus." 

Sic  fatus  galeam  laeva  tenet,  atque  reflexa  535 

Cervice  orantis  capulo  tenus  applicat  ensem. 

Nec  procul  Haemonides,  Phoebi  Tri^^iaeque  sacerdos, 

Infula  cui  sacra  redimihat  tempora  vitta, 

Totus  collucens  veste  atque  insignibus  armis : 

Quem  cbngressus  agit  campo,  lapsumque  superstans    540 

Immolat,  ingentique  umbra  tegit ;  |irma  Serestus 

Lecta  refert  humeris,  tibi,  rex  Gradive,  tropaeum. 

Instaurant  acies  Yulcani  stirpe  creatus 

Caecuhis  et  veniens  Marsorum  montibus  Umbro. 

Dardanides  contra  furit.     Anxuris  ense  sinistram         545 

Et  totum  clipei  ferro  dejecerat  orbem ;  - 

Dixerat  ille  aliquid  magnum,  vimque  affore  verbo 

Crediderat,  coeloque  animum  fortasse  ferebat, 

Canitiemque  sibi  et  longos  promiserat  annos ;  - 

Tarquitus  exsultans  contra  fulgentibus  armis,  *  550 

Silvicolae  Fauno  Dryope  quem  nympha  crearat, 

Obvius  ardenti  sese  obtulit.     Ille  reducta 

Loricam  cHpeique  ingens  onus  impedit  hasta. 

Tum  caput  orantis  nequidquam  et  multa  parantis 

Dicere  deturbat  terrae,  truncumque  tepentem  555 

Provolvens,  super  haec  inimico  pectore  fatur  : 

"  Istic  nunc,  metuende,  jace  !     Non  te  optima  mater 

"  Condet  humo,  patrioque  onerabit  membra  sepulcro, 

"  Alitibus  linquere  feris,  aut  gurgite  mersum 

'■  Unda  feret,  piscesque  impasti  vulnera  lambcnt."       560 

Protenus  Antaeum  et  Lucam,  priina  agmina  Turni, 

Persequitur  fortemque  Numam  fulvumque  Camertcm, 

Magnanimo  Volscente  satum,  ditissimus  agri 

Qui  fuit  Ausonidiim  et  tacitis  regnavit  AmycHs. 

Aegaeon  qualis,  centum  cui  brachia  dicunt  565 


236  AENEIDOS    LIB.    X. 

Centenasque  manus,  quinquaginta  oribus  ignem 

Pectoribusque  arsisse,  Jovis  quum  fulmina  contra 

Tot  paribus  streperct  clipeis,  tot  stringeret  enses  : 

Sic  toto  Aeneas  desaevit  in  aequore  victor, 

Ut  semel  intepuit  muoro.     Quin  ecce  Nipliaei  570 

Quadriiuges  in  equos  adversaque  pectora  tendit ; 

Atque  illi  longe  gradicntem  et-dira  frementem 

Ut  videre,  metu  versi  retroque  ruentes 

Effunduntque  ducem,  rapiuntque  ad  litora  currum. 

Interea  bijugis  infert  se  Lucagus  albis  575 

In  medios  fraterque  Liger  ;  sed  frater  liabenis 

Flectit  equos,  strictum  rotat  acer  Lucagus  ensem. 

Haud  tulit  Aeneas  tanto  fervore  furentes : 

Irruit,  adversaque  ingens  apparuit  liasta, 

Cui  Liger :  580 

"  Non  Diomedis  equos,  nec  currum  cernis  AcLilli 

"  Aut  Phrygiae  carapos ;  nunc  belli  tinis  et  aevi 

"  His  dabitur  terris."     Vesano  talia  late 

Dicta  volant  Ligeri ;  sed  non  et  Troius  heros 

Dicta  parat  contra  :  jaculum  nam  torquet  in  hostes.    585 

Lucagus  ut  pronus  pendens  in  verbera  telo 

Admonuit  bijugos,  projecto  dum  pede  laevo 

Aptat  se  pugnae  ;  subit  oras  hasta  per  imas 

Fulgentis  clipei,  tum  laevum  perforat  inguen : 

Excussus  curru  moribundus  volvitur  arvis.  590 

Quem  pius  Aeneas  dictis  affatur  amaris  : 

"  Lucage,  nuHa  tuos  currus  fuga  segnis  equorum 

*'  Prodidit,  aut  vanae  vertere  ex  hostibus  umbrae  ; 

"  Ipse  rotis  saliens  juga  deseris."     Haec  ita  fiitus 

ArrijDuit  bijugos.     Frater  tendebat  inertes  595 

Infchx  palmas,  curru  delapsus  codem : 

"  Per  te,  per  qui  te  talem  gcnuere  parentes, 

"  Vir  Trojaue,  sine  hanc  animam,  et  miserere  precantis !  " 

Pluribus  oranti  Aeneas :  "  llaud  talia  dudum 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    X.  237 

"  Dicta  dabas.     Morere,  et  fratrera  ne  desere  frater."  600 

Tum  latebras  animae,  pectus,  mucrone  recludit. 

Talia  per  campos  edebat  funera  ductor 

Dardanius,  torrentis  aquae  vel  turbinis  atri 

More  furens.     Tandem  erumpunt  et  castra  relinquunt 

Ascanius  puer  et  nequidquam  obsessa  juventus.  605 

Junonem  interea  compellat  Jupiter  ultro  : 
"  0  germaria  mihi  atque  eadem  gratissima  conjux, 
"  Ut  rebare,  Venus-nec  te  sententia  fallit- 
"  Trojanas  sustentat  opes  :  non  vivida  bello 
"  Dextra  viris  animusque  ferox  patiensque  pericli."       610 
Cui  Juno  submissa  :  "  Quid,  o  pulcherrime  conjux, 
"  Sollicitas  aegram  et  tua  tristia  dicta  timentem  "? 
"  Si  mihi,  quae  quondam  fuerat,  quamque  csse  decebat, 
'•'  Vis  in  amore  foret.     Non  hoc  mihi  namque  negares, 
"  Omnipotens,  quin  et  pugnae  subducere  Turnum,       615 
"  Et  Dauno  possem  incolumem  servare  parenti. 
"  Nunc  pereat,  Teucrisque  pio  det  sanguine  poenas. 
"  Ille  tamen  nostra  deducit  origine  nomen, 
"  Pilumnusque  illi  quartus  pater,  et  tua  larga 
"  Saepe  manu  multisque  oneravit  limina  douis."  620 

Cui  rex  aetherii  breviter  sic  fatus  Olympi : 
"  Si  mora  praesentis  leti  tempusque  caduco 
"  Oratur  juveni,  meque  hoc  ita  ponere  sentis ; 
"  ToUe  fuga  Turnum  atque  instantibus  eripe  fatis : 
"  Hactenus  indulsisse  vacat.     Sin  altior  istis  625 

"  Sub  precibus  venia  ulla  latet,  totumque  moveri 
"  Mutarive  putas  bellum ;  spes  pascis  iuaues." 
Et  Juno  allacrimans :  "  Quid,  si,  quae  voce  gravaris, 
"  Mente  dares,  atque  haec  Turno  rata  vita  maneret  ? 
•'  Nunc  manet  insontem  gravis  exitus,  aut  ego  veri      630 
"  Vana  feror.     Quod  ut  o  potius  formidine  falsa 
"  Ludar,  et  in  melius  tua,  qui  potes,  orsa  rcflectas  !  " 
Haec  ubi  dicta  dedit,  coelo  se  protenus  alto 


238  AENEIDOS   LIB.    X. 

Misit,  agens  hiemem  nimbo  siiccincta  yer  auras, 

Iliacamque  aciem  et  Laurentia  castra  petivit.  G35 

Tum  dea  nube  cava  teuuem  sine  viribus  umbram 

In  faciem  Aencae-visu  mirabile  monstrum- 

Dardaniis  ornat  telis,  clipeumque  jubasque 

Divini  assimulat  capitis,  dat  inania  verba, 

Dat  sine  mente  sonum,  gressusque  effingit  cimtis :        G40 

Morte  obita  quales  fama  est  volitare  figuras, 

Aut  quae  sopitos  deludunt  somnia  sensus. 

At  primas  laeta  ante  acies  exsultat  imago, 

Irritatque  virum  telis  et  voce  lacessit. 

Instat  cui  Turnus,  stridentemque  eminus  hastam         645 

Conjicit ;  illa  dato  vertit  vestigia  tergo. 

Tum  vero  Aenean  aversum  ut  cedere  Turnus 

Credidit,  atque  animo  spem  turbidus  hausit  inanem : 

"  Quo  fugis,  Aenea  ?  Thalamos  ne  desere  pactos  ! 

"  Hac  dabitur  dextra  tellus  quaesita  per  undas.''  650 

Talia  vociferans  sequitur,  strictumque  coruscat 

Mucronem,  nec  ferre  videt  sua  gaudia  ventos. 

Forte  ratis  celsi  conjuncta  crepidine  saxi 

Exjjositis  stabat  scalis  et  ponte  parato, 

Qua  rex  Clusinis  advectus  Osinius  oris:  655 

Huc  sese  trepida  Aeneae  fugientis  imago 

Conjicit  in  latebras  ;  nec  Turnus  segnior  instat, 

Exsuperatque  moras  et  i)ontes  transiHt  altos. 

Vix  proram  attigerat :  lumpit  Saturnia  funem, 

Avulsamque  rapit  revokita  pcr  aequora  navem.  660 

Tum  levis  haud  ultra  latebras  jam  quaerit  imago, 

Sed  subhme  volans  nubi  se  immiscuit  atrac. 

Ilhim  autem  Aeneas  absentem  in  proeha  poscit ; 

Obvia  multa  virum  demittit  corjjora  morti : 

Quum  Turiium  medio  interea  fcrt  acquore  turbo.  G65 

Kcspicit  ignarus  rerum  ingratusque  salutis, 

Et  duphccs  cum  voco  manus  ad  sidcra  tcndit : 


AENEIDOS    LIB,    X.  239 

"  Omnipotens  genitor,  tanton'  me  crimino  dignum 
'*  Dnxisti,  et  tales  voluisti  expendere  poenas  ? 
"  Quoferor  ?  unde  abii  ?  quae  me  fuga,  quemvc  reducit  ?  670 
''  Laurentesne  iterum  muros  aut  castra  videbo  ? 
"  Quid  manus  illa  virum,  qui  me  meaque  arma  secuti, 
*•  Quosque  -  nefas  -  omnes  infanda  in  morte  reliqui, 
"  Et  nunc  palantes  video,  gemitumque  cadentum 
"  Accipio  ?  Quid  ago,  aut  quae  jam  satis  ima  dehiscat  675 
"  Terra  milii  ?     Yos  o  jDotius  miserescite,  venti ! 
"  In  rupes,  in  saxa-volens  vos  Turnus  adoro- 
"  Ferte  ratem,  saevisque  vadis  immittite  Syrtis, 
"  Quo  neque  me  Rutuli,  nec  conscia  fama  sequatur." 
Haec  memorans,  animo  nunc  huc  nunc  fluctuat  illuc,  680 
An  sese  mucrone  ob  tantum  dedecus  amens 
Induat,  et  crudum  per  costas  exigat  ensem  ; 
Fluctibus  an  jaciat  mediis,  et  litora  nando 
Curva  petat,  Teucrumque  iterum  se  reddat  in  arma. 
Ter  conatus  utramque  viam :  ter  maxima  Juno  685 

Continuit,  juvenemque  animo  miserata  repressit. 
Labitur  alta  secans  fluctuque  aestuque  secundo, 
Et  patris  antiquam  Dauni  defertur  ad  urbem. 
At  Jovis  interea  monitis  Mezentius  ardens 
Succedit  pugnae,  Teucrosque  invadit  ovantes.  690 

Concurrunt  Tyrrlienae  acies,  atque  omnibus  uni, 
Uni  odiisque  viro  telisque  frequentibus  instant. 
Ille,-velut  rupes,  vastum  quae  prodit  in  aequor 
Obvia  ventorum  furiis  expostaque  ponto, 
Vim  cunctam  atque  minas  perfert  coelique  marisque,  695 
Ipsa  immota  manens,  -  prolem  Dolicliaonis,  Hebrum, 
Sternit  Immi,  cum  quo  Latagum  Palmumque.fugacem- 
Sed  Latagum  saxo  atque  ingenti  fragmine  montis 
Occupat  os  faciemque  adversam,  poplite  Palmum 
Succiso  volvi  segncm  sinit,  armaquc  Lauso  700 

Donat  habere  humcris  ct  vcrtice  figcre  eristas  -, 


240  AENEIDOS   LIB.    X.  ^ 

Nec  non  Evanthen  Phrygiiim,  Paridisque  Mimanta 

Aequalem  comitemque,  una  quem  nocte  Theano 

In  lucem  genitori  Amyco  dcdit,  et  iace  praegnans 

Cisseis  rcgina  Parim  :  Paris  urbo  jjatcrna  705 

Occuhat,  ignarum  Laurens  habet  ora  Mimanta. 

Ac  velut  ille  canum  morsu  de  montibus  altis 

Actus  aper,  multos  Vesulus  quem  pinifer  annos 

Defendit  multosque  palus  Laurentia,  silva 

Pastus  arundinca,  postquam  inter  retia  ventum  est,     710 

Substitit,  infremuitque  ferox  et  inhorruit  armos ; 

Nec  cuiquam  irasci  propiusve  accedere  virtus, 

Sed  jaculis  tutisque  procul  clamoribus  instant ; 

Ille  autem  impavidus  partes  cunctatur  in  omnes, 

Deutibus  infrendens,  et  tergo  decutit  hastas  :  715 

Haud  aliter,  justae  quibus  est  Mezentius  irae, 

Non  ulli  est  animus  stricto  concurrere  ferro  ; 

Migsilibus  longe  et  vasto  clamore  lacessunt. 

Venerat  antiquis  Corythi  de  finibus  Acron, 

Graius  homo,  infectos  linquens  profugus  hymenaeos :    720 

Hunc  ubi  miscentem  longe  media  agmina  vidit, 

Purpureum  pennis  et  pactae  conjugis  ostro ; 

Impastus  stabula  alta  leo  ceu  saepe  peragrans- 

Suadet  enim  vesana  fames  -  si  forte  fugacem 

Conspexit  capream  aut  surgentcm  iu  cornua  cervum,  725 

Gaudet,  hians  immane,  comasque  arrexit,  et  haeret 

Visccribus  super  incumbens,  lavit  improba  teter 

Ora  cruor : 

Sic  ruit  in  densos  alacer  Mezentius  hostes. 

Sternitur  infelix  Acron,  et  calcibus  atram  730 

Tundit  liumum  exs})irans,  infracttiquc  tela  cruentat. 

Atque  idem  fugientem  haud  est  dignatus  Oroden 

Sternero,  nec  jacta  caecum  dare  cuspide  vulnus  ; 

Obvius  adversoquc  occurrit,  seque  viro  vir 

Contulit,  haud  furto  melior  sed  fortibus  armis.  735 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    X.  241 

Tum  super  abjectum  posito  pede  nixus  et  hasta, 

"  Pars  belli  haucl  temnenda;  viri,  jacet  altus  Orodes." 

Conclamant  socii  laetum  paeana  secuti. 

Ille  autem  exspirans :  "Non  me,  quicumque  es,  inulto, 

"  Victor,  nec  longum  lactabere  :  te  quoque  fata  740 

"  Prospectant  paria,  atque  eadem  mox  arva  tenebis." 

Ad  quem  subridens  mixta  Mezentius  ira : 

"  Nunc  morere  ;  ast  de  me  divum  pater  atque  hominum  rex 

"  Viderit !  "     Hoc  dicens  eduxit  corpore  telum  ; 

Olli  dura  quies  oculos  et  ferreus  urguet  745 

Somnus,  in  aeternam  clauduntur  lumina  noctem. 

Caedicus  Alcathoum  obtruncat ;  Sacrator  Hydaspen  ; 

Partheniumque  Rapo  et  praedurum  viribus  Orsen ; 

Messapus  Cloniumque  Lycaoniumque  Ericeten, 

Illum  infrenis  equi  lapsu  tellure  jacentem,  750 

Hunc  peditem  pedes.     Et  Lycius  processerat  Agis, 

Quem  tamen  haud  expers  Valerus  virtutis  avitae 

Dejicit ;  at  Thronium  Salius,  Saliumque  Nealces, 

Insignis  jaculo  et  longe  fallente  sagitta. 

Jam  gravis  aequabat  luctus  et  mutua  Mavors         755 
Funera  ;  caedebant  pariter  pariterque  ruebant 
Victores  victique,  neque  his  fuga  nota  neque  illis. 
Di  Jovis  in  tectis  iram  miserantur  inaaem 
Amborum,  et  tantos  mortalibus  esse  labores : 
Hinc  Venus,  hinc  contra  spectat  Saturnia  Juno  ;  7G0 

Pallida  Tisiphone  media  inter  millia  saevit. 
At  vero  ingentem  quatiens  Mezentius  hastam 
Turbidus  ingreditur  campo.     Quam  magnus  Orion, 
Quum  pedes  incedit  medii  per  maxima  "N"ftrfti 
Stagna,  viam  scindens,  humero  supereminet  undas,       7G5 
Aut,  summis  referens  annosam  montibus  ornum, 
Ingrediturque  solo  et  caput  inter  nubila  condit : 
Talis  se  vastis  infert  Mezentius  armis, 
Huic  contra  Aeneas,  speculatus  in  agmine  longo, 
11 


242  AENEIDOS    LIB.    X. 

Obvius  i»-e  parat.     Manet  imperterritus  ille,  770 

Hostem  magnanimum  oppericns,  et  molc  sua  stat, 

Atquc  oculis  spatium  emensus,  quantum  satis  hastae, 

"  Dextra  mibi  deus  et  telum,  quod  missile  libro, 

"  Nunc  adsint !     Voveo  praedonis  corpore  raptis 

"  Indutum  spoliis  ipsum  te,  Lause,  tropaeum  775 

'•'  ATencae."     Dixit,  stridentemqiie  cminus  hastam 

Jecit ;  at  illa  volans  clipeo  est  excussa,  proculque 

Egregium  Antoren  latus  inter  et  ilia  figit, 

Herculis  Antorcn  comitem,  qui  missus  ab  Argis 

Haeserat  Evandro  atque  Itala  consederat  urbe.  780 

Sternitur  infelix  alieno  vulnere,  coelumque 

Adspicit  et  dulces  moriens  reminiscitur  Argos. 

Tum  pius  Aeneas  hastam  jacit :  illa  per  orbem 

Aere  cavum  triplici,  per  linea  terga,  tribusque 

Transiit  intextum  tauris  opus,  imaque  sedit  785 

Inguine  ;  sed  vircs  haud  pertulit.     Ocius  ensem 

Aeneas,  viso  Tyrrheni  sanguine  laetus, 

Eripit  a  femine,  et  trepidanti  fervidus  instat. 

Ingemuit  cari  graviter  genitoris  amore, 

Ut  vidit,  Lausus,  lacrimaeque  per  ora  volutae.  790 

Hic  mortis  durae  casum  tuaque  optima  facta, 

Si  qua  fidem  tanto*est  operi  latura  vetustas, 

Non  equidem,  nec  tc,  juvenis  mcmorande,  silebo. 

Ille  pedem  rcfcrens  et  inutilis  inquc  ligatus 

Cedebat,  clipeoque  inimicum  hastile  trahebat :  795 

Proripuit  juvenis  scscque  immiscuit  armis, 

Jamque  assurgcntis  dextra  plagamque  ferentis 

Aeneac  subiit  mucronem,  ipsumque  morando 

Sustinuit.     Socii  magno  clamore  sequuntur, 

Dum  genitor  nati  parma  protectus  abiret,  800 

Telaque  conjiciunt,  proturbantque  eminus  hostem 

Missilibus.     Furit  Aeneas,  tectusque  tenet  se. 

^c  velut,  eflfusa  si  quando  grandine  nimbi 


AENEIDOy    LIB.    X,  243 

Praecipitant,  omnis  campis  diffagit  arator, 

Omnis  et  agricola,  et  tuta  latet  arce  viator  805 

Aiit  amnis  ripis  aut  alti  fornice  saxi, 

Dum  pluit  in  terris,  ut  possint,  sole  redacto, 

Exercere  diem :  sic  obrutus  undique  telis 

Aeneas  nufcem  belli,  dum  detonet  omnis, 

Sustinet  et  Lausum  increpitat,  Lausoque  minatur :      810 

'"  Quo  moriture  ruis,  majoraque  viribus  audes  ? 

"  Fallit  te  incautum  pietas  tua."     Nec  minus  ille 

Exsultat  demens  ;  saevae  jamque  altius  irae 

Dardanio  surgunt  ductori,  extremaque  Lauso 

Parcae  fila  legunt :  validum  namque  exigit  ensem       815 

Per  medium  Aeneas  juvenem,  totumque  recondit ; 

Transiit  et  parmam  mucro,  levia  arma  minacis, 

Et  tunicam,  moUi  mater  quam  neverat  auro ; 

Implevitque  sinum  sanguis  ;  tum  vita  per  auras 

Concessit  maesta  ad  Manes,  corpusque  reliquit.  820 

At  vero  ut  vultum  vidit  morientis  et  ora, 

Ora  modis  Anchisiades  pallentia  miris, 

Ingemuit  miserans  graviter,  dextramque  tetendit, 

Et  mentem  patriae  subiit  pietatis  imago. 

"  Quid  tibi  nunc,  miserande  puer,  pro  laudibus  istis,    825 

"  Quid  pius  Aeneas  tanta  dabit  indole  dignum  ? 

"  Arma,  quibus  laetatus,  habe  tua,  teque  parentiim 

"  Manibus  et  cineri,  si  qua  est  ea  cura,  remitto. 

"  Hoc  tamen  infelix  miseram  solabere  mortem  : 

"  Aeneae  magni  dextra  cadis."     Increpat  ultro  830 

Cunctantes  socios,  et  terra  sublevat  ipsum, 

Sanguine  turpantem  comtos  de  more  capillos. 

Interea  genitor  Tiberini  ad  fluminis  undam 

Vulnera  siccabat  lymphis,  corpusque  lcvabat 

Arboris  acclinis  trunco  ;  procul  aerea  ramis  835 

Dependet  galea,  et  prato  gravia  arma  quiescunt. 

Stant  lecti  circum  juvenes  ;  ipsc  aeger,  anhelans. 


244  AENEIDOS   LIB,    X. 

Colla  fovet,  fusus  j^ropexam  in  pectore  barbam. 

Multa  super  Lauso  rogitat,  multosque  remittit, 

Qui  revocent  maestique  ferant  mandata  parentis.  840 

At  Lausum  socii  exanimem  super  arma  ferebant 

Flentes,  ingentem  atque  ingenti  vulnere  victum. 

Aguovit  longe  gemitum  praesaga  mali  mens : 

Canitiem  multo  deformat  pulvere,  et  ambas 

Ad  coelum  tendit  palmas,  et  corpore  inhaeret.  845 

"  Tantane  me  tenuit  vivendi,  nate,  voluptas, 

"  Ut  pro  me  hostili  paterer  succedere  dextrae, 

"  Quem  genui  ?     Tuane  haec  genitor  per  vuhicra  servor, 

"  Morte  tua  vivens  ?     Heu,  nunc  misero  mihi  demum 

"  Exitium  infelix  ;  nunc  alte  vuhius  adactum  !  850 

"  Idem  ego,  nate,  tuum  maculavi  crimine  nomen, 

"  Pulsus  ob  invidiam  soho  sceptrisque  paternis. 

"  Debueram  patriae  poenas  odiisque  meorum  : 

"  Omnes  per  mortes  animam  sontem  ipse  dedissem  ! 

"  Nunc  vivo,  neque  adhuc  homines  lucemque  relinquo.  855 

"  Sed  hnquam."     Simul  hoc  dicens  attolht  in  aegrum 

Se  femur,  et,  quamquam  vis  alto  vulnere  tardat, 

Haud  dejectus  equum  duci  jubet.     Hoc  decus  ihi, 

Hoc  soLamen  erat,  behis  hoc  victor  abibat 

Omnibus.     AUoquitur  maerentem  et  tahbus  infit :       860 

"  Khaebe,  diu-res  si  qua  diu  mortahbus  ulla  est- 

"  Viximus.     Aut  hodie  victor  spoha  ilhi  cruenta 

"  Et  caput  Aeneae  referes,  Lausique  dolorum 

"  Ultor  eris  mecum ;  aut,  aj)erit  si  nulla  viam  vis, 

"  Occumbes  pariter :  neque  enim,  fortissime,  credo,      865 

"  Jussa  ahena  pati  et  dominos  dignabere  Teucros." 

Dixit,  et  exceptus  tergo  consueta  locavit 

Membra,  manusque  ambas  jacuhs  oneravit  acutis, 

Aere  caput  fulgens  cristaque  hirsutus  equina. 

Sic  cursum  in  medios  rapidus  dedit :  aestuat  iugens    870 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    X.  245 

Uno  in  corde  piidor,  mixtoque  insania  luctu, 

[Et  furiis  agitatus  amor  et  conscia  virtus.] 

Atque  liic  Aenean  magna  ter  voce  vocavit. 

Aeneas  agnovit  eum,  laetusque  precatur : 

''  Sic  pater  ille  deum  faciat,  sic  altus  ApoUo  !  875 

"  Incipias  conferre  manum." 

Tantum  efiatus,  et  infesta  suLit  obvius  hasta. 

Ille  autem  :  "  Quid  me,  erepto,  saevissime,  iiato 

"  Terres  ?     Haec  via  sola  fuit,  qua  perdere  posses, 

"  Nec  mortem  horremus,  nec  divum  parcimus  uUi.       880 

"  Desine :  nam  venio  moriturus,  et  haec  tibi  porto 

"  Dona  prius."     Dixit,  telumque  intorsit  in  hostem. 

Inde  aUud  super  atque  aUud  figitque,  yolatque 

Ingenti  gyro  ;  sed  sustinet  aureus  umbo. 

Ter  circum  adstantem  laevos  equitavit  in  orbes,  885 

Tela  manu  jaciens ;  ter  secum  Troius  heros 

Immanem  aerato  circumfert.  tegmine  silvam. 

Inde  ubi  tot  traxisse  moras,  tot  spicula  taedet 

VeUere,  et  urguetur  pugna  congressus  iniqua  ; 

Multa  movens  animo,  jam  tandem  erumpit,  et  inter     890 

BeUatoris  equi  cava  tempora  conjicit  hastam. 

ToUit  se  arrectum  quadrupes  et  calcibus  auras 

Verberat,  efi^usumque  equitem  super  ipse  secutus 

ImpUcat,  ejectoque  incumbit  cernuus  armo. 

Clamore  inccndunt  coelum  Troesque  Latinique.  895 

Advolat  Aeneas,  vaginaque  eripit  ensem, 

Et  super  haec  :  "  Ubi  nunc  Mezentius  acer  et  Ula 

"  Efiera  vis  animi  ?  '*     Contra  Tyrrhenus,  ut  auras 

Suspiciens  hausit  coelum  mentemque  recepit : 

"  Hostis  amare,  quid  increpitas  mortemque  minaris  ?  900 

"  NuUum  in  caede  nefas,  nec  sic  ad  proeUa  veni, 

"  Nec  tecum  meus  haec  pepigit  mihi  foedera  Lausus. 

"  Unum  hoc,  per  si  qua  est  victis  venia  hostibus,  oro, 


246  AENEIDOS    LIB.    X. 

"  Corpus  liumo  patiare  tegi.     Scio  acerba  meonim 

"  Circumstare  odia  :  liunc,  oro,  defende  furorem,  905 

"  Et  me  consortem  nati  concede  sepulcro." 

Haec  loquitur,  juguloque  liaud  inscius  accipit  ensem, 

Undanti^jue  aD> -xam  diffundit  in  arma  cruore. 


P.   VIRGILII   MAROJs^S 

AENEIDOS 

LIBEE  UNDECIMUS. 


Oceanum  iuterea  surgeus  Aurora  reliquit : 

Aeneas,  quamquam  et  sociis  dare  tempus  liumandis 

Praecipitant  curae,  turbataque  funere  mens  est, 

Vota  deum  primo  victor  solvebat  Eoo. 

Ingentem  quercum  decisis  undique  ramis  5. 

Constituit  tumulo,  fulgentiaque  induit  arma, 

Mezenti  ducis  exuvias,  tibi,  magne,  tropaeum, 

Bellipotens ;  aptat  rorantes  sanguine  cristas, 

Telaque  trunca  viri  et  bis  sex  tlioraca  petitum 

Perfossumque  locis,  clipeumque  er  aere  sinistrae  10 

Subligat,  atque  ensem  coUo  suspendit  eburnum. 

Tum  socios  -  namque  omnis  eum  stipata  tegebat 

Turba  ducum  -  sic  incipiens  hortatur  ovantes 

"  Maxima  res  effecta,  viri :  timor  omnis  abesto, 

"  Quod  superest :  baec  sunt  spolia  et  de  rege  superbo    15 

''  Primitiae,  manibusquc  meis  Mezentius  liic  est. 

"  Nunc  iter  ad  regem  nobis  murosque  Latinos  : 

"  Arma  parate  animis,  et  spe  praesumite  bellum, 

"  Ne  qua  mora  ignaros,  ubi  primum  vellere  signa 

"  Adnueriut  superi  pubcmque  cducere  castris,  .       20 

"  Impediat,  segnesve  mctu  sententia  tardet. 


248  AENEIDOS    LIB.    XI. 

-^'  Interea  socios  inhumataque  corpora  torrae 
"  Mandemus,  qui  solus  honos  Acheronte  sub  imo  est. 
"  Ite,"  ait  ''  egregias  animas,  quae  sanguine  nobis 
"  Hanc  patrlam  pepcrere  suo,  decorate  suprcmis  25 

"  Muneribus  ;  maestamque  Evandri  primus  ad  urbem 
"  Mittatur  Pallas,  quem  non  virtutis  cgcntem 
"  Abstulit  atra  dies  et  funcre  mcrsit  acerbo." 
Sic  ait  illacrimans  recipitque  ad  limina  grcssum, 
Corpus  ubi  exanimi  positum  Pallantis  Acoctes  30 

Servabat  senior,  qui  Parrbasio  Evandro 
Armiger  ante  fuit,  sed  non  felicibus  aeque 
Tum  comes  auspiciis  caro  datus  ibat  alumno. 
Circum  omnis  famulumque  manus  Trojanaque  turba 
Et  maestum  Iliades  crinem  de  more  solutae.  35 

Ut  vero  Aeneas  foribus  sese  intulit  altis  ; 
Ingentem  gemitum  tunsis  ad  sidera  tollunt 
Pectoribus,  maostoque  immugit  rcgia  luctu. 
Ipse,  caput  nivei  fultum  Pallantis  et  ora 
Ut  vidit,  levique  patens  in  pectore  vulnus  40 

Cuspidis  Ausoniae,  lacrimis  ita  fatm  obortis  : 
"  Tene,"  inquit  "  miserande  puer,  cum  laeta  veniret, 
"  Invidit  Fortuna  mihi,  ne  regna  videres 
"  Nostra,  neque  ad  sedes  victor  veherere  paternas  ? 
"  Non  haec  Evandro  de  te  promissa  parenti  45 

"  Discedens  dcderam,  cum  me  complexus  euntem 
"  Mitteret  in  magnum  imperium,  metuensque  moneret, 
"  Acres  esse  viros,  cum  dura  proelia  gente. 
"  Et  nunc  ille  quidem  spe  multum  captus  inani 
"  Fors  et  vota  facit,  cumulatque  altaria  donis  ;  50 

"  Nos  juvenem  exanimum  et  nil  jam  coelestibus  ulUs 
"  Debentem  vano  macsti  comitamur  honore. 
"  Infclix,  nati  funus  criidele  videbis ! 
'*  Hi  nostri  reditus,  exspectatique  triumphi! 
"  Hacc  mea  magna  fidcs!     At  non,  Evandre,  pudendis  55 


AENEIDOS   LIB,    XI,  249 

"  Vulneribus  pulsum  adspicies,  nec  sospite  dirum 
"  Optabis  nato  funus  pater.     Hei  mihi,  quantum 
"  Praesidium  Ausonia,  et  quantum  tu  perdis,  lule  !  " 
Haec  ubi  deflevit,  tolli  miserabile  corpus 
Imperat  et  toto  lectos  ex  agmine  mittit  60 

Mille  viros,  qui  supremum  comitentur  honorem, 
Intersintque  patris  lacrimis,  solatia  luctus 
Exigua  ingentis,  misero  sed  debita  patri. 
Haud  segnes  alii  crates  et  molle  feretrum 
Arbuteis  texunt  virgis  et  vimine  querno,  65 

Exstructosque  toros  obtentu  frondis  inumbrant. 
Hic  juvenem  agresti  sublimem  stramine  ponunt, 
Qualem  virgineo  demessum  poUice  florem 
Seu  mollis  violae  seu  languentis  hyacinthi, 
Cui  neque  fulgor  adhuc  nec  dum  sua  forma  recessit,      70 
Non  jam  mater  alit  telhis  viresque  ministrat. 
Tum  geminas  vestes  auroque  ostroque  rigentes 
Extulit  Aeneas,  quas  illi  laeta  laborum 
Ipsa  suis  quondam  manibus  Sidonia  Dido 
Fecerat,  et  tenui  telas  discreverat  auro.  75 

Harum  unam  juveni  supremum  maestus  honorem 
Induit,  arsurasque  comas  obnubit  amictu  ; 
Multaque  praeterea  Laurentis  praemia  pugnae 
Aggerat  et  longo  praedam  jubet  ordine  duci. 
Addit  equos  et  tela,  quibus  spoliaverat  hostem.  80 

Vinxerat  et  post  terga  manus,  quos  mitteret  umbris 
Inferias,  caeso  sparsurus  sanguine  flammam  ; 
Indutosque  jubet  truncos  hostilibus  armis 
Ipsos  ferre  duces,  inimicaque  nomina  figi. 
Ducitur  infelix  aevo  confectus  Acoetes,  85 

Pectora  nunc  foedans  pugnis,  nunc  unguibus  ora : 
Sternitur  et  toto  projectus  corpore  terrae. 
Ducunt  et  Kutulo  peifusos  sanguine  currus. 
Post  bellator  equus,  positis  insignibus,  Aethon, 
11* 


250  AENEIDOS   LIB.    XI, 

It  lacrimans,  guttisque  humectat  grandibus  ora.  90 

Hastam  alii  galeamque  ferunt :  nam  cetera  Turnus 
Victor  babet.  Tum  maesta  pbalanx,  Teucrique  sequuntur 
Tyrrbenique  omnes  et  versis  Arcades  armis. 
Postquam  omnis  longe  comitum  processerat  ordo  ; 
Substitit  Aeneas,  gemituque  baec  edidit  alto  :  95 

*'  Nos  alias  binc  ad  lacrimas  eadem  borrida  belli 
"  Fata  vocant :  salve  aeternum  mibi,  maxime  Palla, 
"  Aeternumque  vale."     Nec  phira  effatus,  ad  altos 
Tendebat  muros,  gressumque  in  castra  ferebat. 

Jamque  oratores  aderant  ex  urbe  Latina,  100 

Velati  ramis  oleae  veniamque  rogantes, 
Corpora,  per  campos  ferro  quae  fusa  jacebant, 
Eedderet  ac  tumulo  sineret  succedere  terrae  : 
Nullum  cum  victis  certamen  et  aetbere  cassis ; 
Parceret  bospitibus  quondam  socerisque  vocatis.  105 

Quos  bonus  Aeneas  baud  aspernanda  precantes 
Prosequitur  venia  et  vei-bis  baec  insuper  addit  : 
"  Quaenam  vos  tanto  fortuna  indigna,  Latini, 
"  Implicuit  bello,  qui  nos  fugiatis  amicos  ? 
"  Pacem  me  exanimis  et  Martis  sorte  peremtis  110 

"  Oratis  ?     Equidem  et  vivis  concedere  vellem. 
"  Nec  veni,  nisi  fata  locum  sedemque  dedissent ; 
"  Nec  bellum  cum  gente  gero  ;  rex  nostra  reliquit 
"  Hospitia  et  Turni  potius  se  credidit  armis. 
"  Aequius  buic  Turnum  fuerat  se  opponere  morti.        115 
"  Si  beUum  finire  manu,  si  pellere  Teucros 
"  Apparat :  bis  mecum  decuit  concurrere  teH"s  ; 
"  Vixet,  cui  vitam  deus  aut  sua  dextra  dedisset. 
"  Nunc  ite  et  miseris  supponite  civibus  ignem." 
Dixerat  Aeneas ;  olli  obstupucre  silentes,  120 

Conversique  oculos  inter  se  atque  ora  tenebant. 
Tum  senior  semperque  odiis  et  criminc  Drances 
Infensus  juveni  Turno  sic  ore  vicissim 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    XI.  251 

Orsa  refert :  "  0  fama  ingens,  ingentior  armis, 

"  Vir  Trqjane,  qiiibus  coelo  te  laudibus  aequem  ?         125 

"  Justitiaene  prius  mirer  belline  laborum  ? 

"  Nos  vero  haec  patriam  grati  referemus  ad  urbem, 

"  Et  te,  si  qua  viam  dederit  fortuna,  Latino 

"  Jungemus  regi ;  quaerat  sibi  foedera  Turnus. 

"  Quin  et  fatales  murorum  attollere  moles,  130 

"  Saxaque  subvectare  humeris  Trojana  juvabit." 

Dixerat  haec,  unoque  omnes  eadem  ore  frcmebant. 

Bis  senos  pepigere  dies,  et  pace  sequestra 

Per  silvas  Teucri  mixtique  impune  Latini 

Erravere  jugis.     Ferro  sonat  alta  bipenni  135 

Fraxinus ;  evertunt  actas  ad  sidera  pinus  ; 

Kobora  nec  cuneis  et  olentem  scindere  cedrum, 

Nec  plaustris  cessant  vectare  gementibus  ornos. 

Et  jam  Fama  volans,  tanti  praenuntia  luctus, 
Evandrum  Evandrique  domos  et  moenia  replet,  140 

Quae  modo  victorem  Latio  Pallanta  ferebat. 
Arcades  ad  portas  ruere,  et  de  more  vetusto 
Funereas  rapuere  faces :  lucet  via  longo 
Ordine  flammarum,  et  late  discriminat  agros. 
Contra  turba  Pbrygum  veniens  plangentia  jungit         145 
Agmina.     Quae  postquam  matres  succedere  tectis 
Viderunt,  maestam  incendunt  clamoribus  urbem. 
At  non  Evandrum  potis  est  vis  ulla  tenere ; 
Sed  venit  in  medios.     Feretro  Pallanta  reposto  149 

Procubuit  super  atque  baeret  lacrimansque  gemeusque, 
Et  via  vix  tandem  vocis  laxata  dolore  est  :  151 

"  Non  haec,  o  Palla,  dederas  promissa  parenti ; 
"  Cautius  ut  saevo  velles  te  credere  Marti. 
"  Haud  ignarus  eram,  quantum  nova  gloria  in  armis 
"  Et  praedulce  decus  primo  certamine  jDOSset.  155 

"  Primitiae  juvenis  miserae,  belli.que  propinqui 
"  Dura  rudimenta,  et  nulli  exaudita  deorum 


2.52  AENEIDOS    LIB.    XI. 

"  Vota  precesquc  meae,  tuquc,  o  «anctissima  conjux, 

"  Felix  morte  tua,  neque  in  hunc  servata  dolorem  ! 

"  Contra  ego  vivenclo  vici  mea  fata,  supcrstes  160 

"  Restarem  ut  genitor,     Troum  socia  arma  secutum 

"  Obruerent  Rutuli  telis  ;  animam  ipse  dedissem, 

"  Atque  liaec  pompa  domum  me,  non  Pallanta,  referret  ! 

"  Nec  vos  arguerim,  Teucri,  nec  foedera,  nec  quas 

"  Junximus  hospitio  dextras  :  sors  ista  senectae  165 

"  Debita  erat  nostrae.     Quod  si  immatura  mancbat 

"  Mors  gnatum  ;  caesis  Volscorum  millibus  ante, 

"  Ducentem  in  Latium  Teucros,  cecidisse  juvaret. 

"  Quin  ego  non  alio  digner  te  funere,  Palla, 

"  Quam  pius  Aeneas,  et  quam  magni  PhrygeS,  et  quam  170 

"  Tyrrhenique  duccs,  Tyrrhenum  exercitus  omnis. 

"  Magna  tropaea  ferunt,  quos  dat  tua  dextera  leto, 

"  Tu  quoque  nunc  stares  immanis  truncus  in  armis, 

"  Esset  par  aetas  et  idem  si  robur  ab  annis, 

"  Turne.     Sed  infelix  Teucros  quid  demoror  armis  ?    175 

"  Vadite  et  haec  memores  regi  mandata  referte : 

"  Quod  vitam  moror  invisam,  PaUante  peremto, 

"  Dextera  causa  tua  est,  Turnum  gnatoque  patrique 

"  Quam  debere  vides.     Meritis  vacat  hic  tibi  solus 

"  Fortunaeque  locus.     Non  vitae  gaudia  quaero  -  180 

"  Nec  fas-,  sed  gnato  Manes  perferre  sub  imos." 

Aurora  interea  miseris  mortalibus  almam 
Extulcrat  lucem,  referens  opera  atquc  labores : 
Jam  pater  Aeneas,  jam  curvo  in  litore  Tarchon 
Constituere  pyras.     Huc  corpora  quisque  suorum         185 
More  tulere  patrum,  subjcctisque  ignibus  atris 
Conditur  in  tenebras  altum  caligine  coehim. 
Ter  circum  accensos  cincti  fulgcntibus  arniis 
Decurrere  rogos ;  ter  maestum  funeris  igncm 
Lustravere  in  equis,  uhilatusque  ore  dedere.  190 

Spargitur  et  teUus  hicrimis.  sparguntur  et  arnui ; 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    XI.  253 

It  coelo  clamorque  virum  clangorque  tubarum. 

Hinc  alii  spolia  occisis  derepta  Latinis 

Conjiciunt  igni,  galeas  ensesque  decoros, 

Frenaque  ferventesque  rotas ;  pars  munera  nota,  195 

Ipsorum  clipeos  et  non  felicia  tela. 

Multa  boum  circa  mactantur  corpora  Morti, 

Setigerosque  sues  raptasque  ex  omnibus  agris 

In  fiammam  jugulant  jDCCudes.     Tum  litore  toto 

Ardentes  spectant  socios,  semiustaque  servant  200 

Busta,  neque  avelli  j^ossunt,  nox  bumida  donec 

Invertit  coelum  stellis  ardentibus  aptum. 

Nec  minus  et  miseri^  diversa  in  parte  Latini 

Innumeras  struxere  j)yras  :  et  corpora  partim 

Multa  virum  terrae  infodiunt,  avectaque  partim  205 

Finitimos  tollunt  in  agros  urbique  remittunt  ; 

Cetera,  confusaeque  ingentem  caedis  acervum, 

Nec  numero  nec  honore  cremant :  tunc  undique  vasti 

Certatim  crebris  coUucent  ignibus  agri. 

Tertia  lux  gelidam  coelo  dimoverat  umbram :  210 

Maerentes  altum  cinerem  et  confusa  mebant 

Ossa  focis,  tepidoque  onerabant  aggere  terrae. 

Jam  vero  in  tectis,  praedivitis  urbe  Latini, 

Praecipuus  fragor  et  longi  pars  maxima  luctus. 

Hic  matres  miseraeque  nurus,  hic  cara  sororum  215 

Pectora  maerentum  puerique  parentibus  orbi 

Dirum  exsecrantur  bellum  Turnique  bymenaeos ; 

Ipsum  armis  ipsumque  jubent  decernere  ferro, 

Qui  regnum  Italiae  et  primos  sibi  poscat  bonores. 

Ingravat  baec  saevus  Drances,  solumque  vocari  220 

Testatur,  solum  posci  in  certamina  Turnum. 

Multa  simul  contra  variis  sententia  dictis 

Pro  Turno,  et  magnum  reginae  nomen  obumbrat ; 

Multa  virum  meritis  sustentat  fama  tropaeis. 

Hos  inter  motus,  medio  in  flagrante  tumultu,         225 


254  AENEIDOS   LIB.    XI. 

Ecce,  super  maesti  magna  Diomedis  ab  urbe 
Legali  responsa  ferunt,  niliil  omnihus  actum 
Tantorum  imj)ensis  operum,  nil  dona  neque  aurum 
Nec  magnas  valuisse  preces,  alia  arma  Latinis 
Quacrenda  aut  pacem  Trojano  ab  rege  petendum.         230 
Deficit  ingenti  luctu  rex  ipse  Latinus  : 
Fatalem  Aenean  manifesto  numine  ferri, 
Admonet  ira  deum  tumulique  ante  ora  recentes. 
Ergo  concilium  magnum  primosque  suorum 
Imperio  accitos  alta  intra  limina  cogit.  235 

Olli  convenere,  fluuntque  ad  regia  plenis 
Tecta  viis.     Sedet  in  mediis  et  maximus  aevo 
Et  primus  sceptris,  haud  laeta  fronfe,  Latinus. 
Atque  bic  legatos  Aetola  ex  urbe  remissos, 
Quae  referant,  fari  jubet,  et  responsa  reposcit  240 

Ordine  cuncta  suo.     Tum  facta  silentia  linguis, 
Et  Venulus  dicto  parens  ita  farier  infit : 
'  Vidimus,  o  cives,  Diomedem  Argivaque  castra, 
^  Atque  iter  emensi  casus  superavimus  omnes, 
'  Contigimusque  manum,  qua  concidit  Ilia  tellus.        245 
'  Ille  urbem  Argyripam,  patriae  cognomine  gentis, 
'  Victor  Gargani  condebat  lapygis  arvis. 
'  Postquam  introgressi  et  coram  data  copia  fandi ; 
'  Munera  praeferimus,  nomen  patriamque  docemus, 
*  Qui  bellum  intulerint,  quae  causa  attraxerit  Arpos.  250 
'  Auditis  ille  haec  placido  sic  rcddidit  ore  : 
-' '  0  fortunatae  gentcs,  Saturnia  regna, 
' '  Antiqui  Ausonii,  quae  vos  fortuna  quietos 
' '  SoUicitat,  suadetque  ignota  laccsscre  bella  ? 
' '  Quicumque  Iliacos  ferro  violavimus  agros  -  255 

'  '  Mitto  ea,  quae  muris  bcllando  exhausta  sub  altis, 
■' '  Quos  Simois  premat  ille  viros  - ,  infanda  per  orbem 
"  ■  Supplicia  ct  scclerum  pocnas  expcndimus  omues, 
"  '  Vel  Priamo  miseranda  manus  :  scit  triste  Minervae 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    XI.  255 

"  '  Sidiis,  et  Euboicae  cautes  iiltorque  Caphereus.         260 

"  '  Militia  ex  illa  diversum  ad  litus  abacti, 

"  '  Atrides  Protei  Menelaus  ad  usque  columnas 

"  '  Exsulat,  Aetnaeos  vidit  Cyclopas  Ulixes. 

"  '  Regna  Neoptolemi  referam,  versosque  penates 

"  '  Idomenei,  Libycone  habitantes  litore  Locros  ?  265 

"  '  Ipse  Mycenaeus  magnorum  ductor  Achivum 

"  '  Conjugis  infandae  prima  intra  limina  dextra 

"  '  Oppetiit ;  devictam  Asiam  subsedit  adulter. 

"  •'  Invidisse  deos,  patriis  ut  redditus  aris 

"  '  Conjugiumoptatum  et  pulchram  Calydonaviderem  ?  270 

"  '  Nunc  etiam  horribili  visu  j^ortenta  scquuntur, 

"  '  Et  socii  amissi  petierunt  aethera  pennis, 

"  '  Fluminibusque  vagantur  aves-heu  dira  meorum 

"  '  Supplicia!-et  scopulos  lacrimosis  vocibus  implent. 

"  '  Haec  adeo  ex  illo  mihi  jam  speranda  fuerunt  275 

"  '  Tempore,  quum  ferro  coelestia  corpora  demens 

"  '  Appetii  et  Veneris  violavi  vulnere  dextram. 

" '  Ne  vero,  ne  me  ad  tales  imj)eUite  pugnas. 

"  '  Nec  mihi  cum  Teucria  ullum  post  eruta  belhim 

"  '  Pergama,  nec  veterum  memini  laetorve  malorum.    280 

"  '  Munera,  quae  patriis  ad  me  portatis  ab  oris, 

"  '  Vertite  ad  Aenean.     Stetimus  tela  aspera  contra^ 

"  '  Contulimusque  manus  :  experto  credite,  quantus 

"  '  In  clipeum  assurgat,  quo  turbine  torqueat  hastam. 

"  '  Si  duo  praeterea  tales  Idaea  tulisset  285 

"  '  Terra  viros,  ultro  Inachias  venisset  ad  urbes 

"  '  Dardanus,  et  versis  lugeret  Graecia  fatis. 

"  '  Quidquid  apud  durae  cessatum  est  moenia  Trojae,» 

"  '  Hectoris  Aeneaeque  manu  victoria  Graium 

"  '  Haesit  et  in  decimum  vestigia  retulit  annum.  290 

"'  Ambo  animis,  ambo  insignes  praestantibus  armis 

"  '  Hic  pietate  prior.     Coeant  in  foedera  dextrac, 

"  '  Qua  datur ;  ast  armis  concurrant  arma  cavete  ! ' 


256  •       AENEIDOS    LIB.    XI. 

"  Et  responsa  simul  quae  sint,  rex  optimc,  regis 

"  Audisti,  et  quae  sit  magno  sententia  bello."  295 

Vix  ea  legati ;  variusquc  pcr  ora  cucurrit 

Ausonidum  turbata  fremor :  ceu  saxa  morantur 

Quum  rapidos  amnes,  fit  clauso  gurgite  murmur, 

Vicinacque  fremunt  ripae  crepitantibus  undis. 

Ut  primum  placati  animi  et  trepida  ora  quierunt,        300 

Praefatus  divos  solio  rex  infit  ab  alto  : 

"  Ante  equidem  summa  de  re  statuisse,  Latini, 

''  Et  vellem,  et  fuerat  melius,  non  tempore  tali 

"  Cogere  concilium,  quum  muros  assidet  liostis. 

"  Bellum  importunum,  cives,  cum  gente  deorum  305 

"  Invictisque  viris  gerimus,  quos  nulla  fatigant 

"  Proelia,  nec  victi  possunt  absistere  ferro. 

"  Spem  si  quam  adscitis  Aetolum  habuistis  in  armis, 

"  Ponite  :  spes  sibi  quisque.  Sed  baec  quam  angusta,  vide- 

"  Cetera  qua  rerum  jaccant  perculsa  ruina,        [tis  ;     310 

"  Ante  oculos  interque  manus  sunt  omnia  vestras. 

"  Nec  quemquam  incuso :  potuit  quae  plurima  virtus 

"  Esse,  fuit ;  toto  certatum  est  corpore  regni. 

"  Nunc  adeo,  quac  sit  dubiae  sententia  menti, 

"  Expediam  et  paucis-animos  adliibete - docebo.  315 

"  Est  antiquus  ager  Tusco  mihi  proximus  amni, 

"  Longus  in  occasum,  fines  super  usque  Sicanos  ; 

"  Aurunci  Ivutulique  serunt  et  vomere  duros 

"  Exerccnt  coUes,  atque  liorum  asperrima  pascunt. 

"  llacc  oninis  regio  ct  cclsi  plaga  pinea  moiitis  320 

"  Cedat  amicitiae  Tcucrorum,  et  focderls  acquas 

"  Dicamus  leges,  sociosque  in  regna  vocemus ; 

"  Considant,  si  tantus  amor,  et  moenia  condant. 

"  Sin  alios  fincs  aliamque  capessere  gentem 

"  Est  animus,  possuntque  solo  ddcedere  nostro ;  325 

"  Bis  denas  Italo  texamus  robore  naves, 

"  Seu  plures  CDmplere  valent  :  jnr>ot  omnis  ad  undam 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    XI.  257 

"  Materies :  ipsi  numerumque  modumque  carinis  • 

"  Praecipiant,  nos  aera,  manus,  navalia  demus. 

"  Praeterea,  qui  dicta  ferant  ct  foedera  firment,  330 

"  Centum  oratores  prima  dc  gente  Latinos 

"  Ire  placet,  pacisque  manu  praetenderc  ramos, 

"  Munera  portantes  aurique  eborisquo  talenta 

"  Et  sellam  regni  trabeamque  insignia  nostri. 

"  Consulite  in  medium  et  rebus  succurrite  fessis  !  "       335 

Tum  Drances,  idem  infensus,  quem  gloria  Turni 

Obliqua  invidia  stimulisque  agitabat  amaris, 

Largus  opum  et  lingua  melior,  sed  frigida  bello , 

Dextera,  consiliis  habitus  non  futilis  auctor, 

Seditione  potens  -  :  genus  huic  materna  superbum       340 

NobiHtas  dabat,  incertum  de  imtre  ferebat  - , 

Surgit  et  his  onerat  dictis  atque  aggerat  iras  : 

"  Kem  nuUi  obscuram  nostrae  nec  vocis  egentem 

"  Consulis,  0  bone  rex.     Cuncti  se  sciro  fatentur, 

"  Quid  fortuna  ferat  populi ;  sed  dicere  mussant.  345 

"  Det  libertatem  fandi  flatusque  remittat, 

"  Cujus  ob  auspicium  infaustura  moresque  sinistros- 

"  Dicam  equidem,  licet  arma  mihi  mortemque  minetur- 

"  Lumina  tot  cecidisse  ducum,  totamque  videmus 

"  Consedisse  urbem  luctu,  dum  Troia  tentat  350 

"  Castra,  fugae  fidens,  et  coelum  territat  armis. 

"  Unum  etiam  donis  istis,  quae  plurima  mitti 

"  Dardanidis  dicique  jubes,  unum,  optime  regum, 

"  Adjicias,  nec  te  ulHus  violentia  vincat, 

"  Quin  natam  egregio  genero  dignisque  hymenaeis        355 

"  Des  pater,  et  pacem  hanc  aeterno  foedere  firmes. 

"  Quod  si  tantus  habet  mentes  et  pectora  tcrror, 

"  Ipsum  obtestemur,  veniamque  oremus  ab  ipso, 

"  Cedat,  jus  proprium  regi  patriaeque  remittat. 

"  Quid  miseros  toties  in  aperta  pericula  cives 

"  Projicis,  0  Latio  caput  horum  et  causa  malorum  ? 


258  AENEIDOS    LIB.    XI, 

"  Nulla  salus  bello ;  pacem  te  poscimus  oiimes, 

"  Turnej  simul  pacis  solum  inviolabile  pignus. 

^'  Primus  ego,  invisum  quem  tu  tibi  fiugis,  et  esse 

"  Nil  moror,  en,  supplex  veuio.     Miserere  tuorum,       365 

"  Pone  animos  et  pulsus  abi :  sat  funera  fusi 

"  Vidimus,  ingentes  et  desolavimus  agros. 

"  Aut,  si  fama  movet,  si  tantum  pectore  robur 

"  Concipis,  et  si  adeo  dotalis  regia  cordi  est ; 

"  Aude,  atque  adversum  fidens  fer  pectus  in  bostem.    370 

"  Scilicet,  ut  Turno  contingat  regia  conjux, 

"  JSTos,  animae  viles,  inbumata  infletaque  turba, 

"  Sternamiir  campis.     Etiam  tu,  si  qua  tibi  vis, 

"  Si  patrii  quid  Martis  babes,  ilhim  adspice  contra, 

"  Qui  vocat !  "  375 

Talibus  exarsit  dictis  violentia  Turni : 

Dat  gemitum,  rumpitque  bas  imo  pcctore  voces : 

"  Larga  quidem,  Drance,  semper  tibi  copia  fandi 

"  Tura,  quum  bella  manus  poscunt,  patribusque  vocatis 

"  Primus  ades  ;  sed  non  replenda  est  curia  verbis,        380 

"  Quac  tuto  tibi  magna  volant,  dum  distinet  hostem 

"  Agger  murorum,  nec  inundant  sanguine  fossae, 

"  Proinde  tona  eloquio  -  soKtum  tibi  -  meque  timoris   - 

"  Argue  tu,  Drance,  quando  tot  stragis  acervos 

"  Teucrorum  tua  dextra  dedit,  passimque  trojDaeis       385 

"  Insignis  agros.     Possit  quid  vivida  virtus, 

"  Experiare  licet ;  nec  longe  scihcet  hostes 

"  Quaerendi  nobis  :  circumstaut  undique  muros, 

"  Imus  in  adversos  ?  —  Quid  cessas  ?  an  tibi  Mavors 

"  Veutosa  in  lingua  pedibusque  fugacibus  istis  390 

"  Scmper  erit  ? 

"  Pulsus  ego  ?  aut  quisquam  merito,  foedissime,  pulsum 

"  Arguct,  IHaco  tumidum  qui  crcscere  Thybrim 

''  Sanguine,  et  Evandri  totam  cum  stiiqic  videbit 

"  Procubuisse  domum,  atque  cxutos  Arcadas  armis.^    395 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    XI.  259 

"  Haud  ita  me  experti  Bitias  et  Pandarus  ingens, 

"  Et  quos  mille  die  victor  sub  Tartara  misi, 

"  Inclusus  muris  liostilique  aggere  septus. 

"  Nulla  salus  hello.     Capiti  cane  talia,  demens, 

"  Dardanio  rebusque  tuis.     Proinde  omnia  magno        400 

"Ne  cessa  turbare  metu,  atque  extollere  vires 

"  Gentis  bis  victae,  contra  premere  arma  Latini. 

"  Nunc  et  Myrmidonum  proceres  Phrygia  arma  tremiscunt , 

"  Nunc  et  Tydides  et  Larissaeus  Achilles, 

"  Amnis  et  Hadriacas  retro  fugit  Aufidus  undas.  405 

"  Vel  cum  se  pavidum  contra  mea  jurgia  fingit 

"  Artificis  scelus,  et  formidine  crimen  acerbat .... 

"  Numquam  animam  talem  dextra  hac-absiste  moveri- 

"  Amittes;  habitet  tecum  et  sit  pectore  in  isto. — 

"  Nunc  ad  te  et  tua  magna,  pater,  consulta  revertor.  410 

"  Sic  nullam  nostris  ultra  spem  ponis  in  armis, 

"  Si  tam  deserti  sumus,  et  semel  agmine  verso 

"  Funditus  occidimus,  neque  habet  Fortuna  regressum ; 

"  Oremus  pacem,  et  dextras  tendamus  inertes  : 

"  Quamquam,  o  si  solitae  quidquam  virtutis  adesset,   415 

"  Ille  mihi  ante  alios  fortunatusque  laborum 

' '  Egregiusque  animi,  qui,  ne  quid  tale  videret, 

"  Procubuit  moriens  et  humum  semel  ore  momordit. 

"  Sin  et  opes  nobis  et  adhuc  intacta  juventus, 

"  Auxilioque  urbes  Italae  populique  supersunt ;  420 

"  Sin  et  Trojanis  cum  multo  gloria  venit 

"  Sanguine  -  sunt  illis  sua  funera,  parque  i^er  omnes 

"  Tempestas  -  :  cur  indecores  in  limine  primo 

' '  Deficimus  ?  cur  ante  tubam  tremor  occupat  artus  ? 

"  Multa  dies  variique  labor  mutabilis  aevi  425 

"  Eetulit  in  melius  ;  multos  alterna  revisens 

"  Lusit  et  in  solido  rursus  Portuna  locavit. 

"  Non  erit  auxilio  nobis  Aetolus  et  Arpi ; 

"  At  Messapus  erit  felixque  Tolumnius,  ct  quos 


260  AENEIDOS   LIB.    XI. 

"  Tot  popiili  raiserc  dviccs  ;  nec  parva  sequetur  430 

"  Gloria  delectos  Latio  et  Laurentibus  agris. 

"  Est  et  Volscorum  egrcgia  de  gente  Camillaj 

'*  Agmen  agens  equitum  et  florentes  aere  catervas 

"  Quodsi  me  solum  Tcucri  in  ccrtamina  poscunt, 

"  Idque  placet,  tantumque  bonis  communibus  obsto  :  435 

''  Non  adeo  has  cxosa  manus  Victoria  fugit, 

"  Ut  tanta  quidquam  pro  spe  tentare  recusem. 

"  Ibo  animis  contra,  vel  magnum  praestet  Acbillen, 

"  Factaque  Vulcani  manibus  paria  induat  arma 

"  Ille  licet.     Vobis  animam  hanc  soceroque  Latino      440 

"  Turnus  ego,  baud  uUi  veterum  virtute  secundus, 

"  Devovi.     Solum  Aeneas  vocat.     Et  vocet  oro  ; 

"  Nec  Drances  potius,  sive  est  haec  ira  deorum, 

"  Morte  luat,  sive  est  virtus  et  gloria,  tollat." 

Illi  haec  inter  se  dubiis  de  rebus  agebant  445 

Certantcs  ;  castra  Aeneas  acicmque  movebat. 
Nuntius  ingenti  per  regia  tecta  tumultu 
Ecce  ruit,  magnisque  urbem  terroribus  implet : 
Instructos  acie  Tiberino  a  flumine  Teucros 
Tyrrhenamque  manum  totis  descendere  campis.  450 

Extemplo  turbati  animi  concussaque  vulgi 
Pectora,  et  arrectae  stimulis  haud  mollibus  irae. 
Arma  manu  trepidi  poscunt ;  frcmit  arma  juventus  ; 
Flent  macsti  mussantque  patres.     Hic  undiquc  clamor 
Dissensu  vario  magnus  se  tollit  ad  auras :  455 

Haud  secus  atque  alto  in  luco  quum  forte  catervae 
Conscdere  avium,  piscosovc  amne  Padusae 
Dant  sonitum  rauci  per  stagna  loquacia  cycni. 
''  Immo,"  ait  "  o  cives,"  arrcpto  tempore  Turnus 
"  Cogite  concilium,  ct  pacem  laudate  scdcntcs ;  460 

"  Illi  armis  in  regna  ruant."     Ncc  plura  locutus 
Corripuit  sese  et  tectis  citus  extulit  altis. 
"  Tu,  Vohisc,  armari  Volscorura  edicc  maniplis. 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    XI.  /  261 

"  Duc  "  ait  "  et  Eutulos  !  Equitem,  Messapus,  in  armis, 

"  Et  cum  fratre  Coras,  latis  difFundite  campis  !  465 

"  Pars  aditus  urbis  firmet,  turresque  capessat  ; 

"  Cetera,  qua  jusso,  mecum  manus  inferat  arma  !  " 

Ilicet  in  muros  tota  discurritur  urbe. 

Concilium  ipse  pater  et  magna  incepta  Latinus 

Deserit,  ac  tristi  turbatus  tempore  differt,  470 

Multaque  se  incusat,  qui  non  accepcrit  ultro 

Dardanium  Aenean  generumque  adsciverit  urbi. 

Praefodiunt  alii  portas,  aut  saxa  sudesque 

Subvectant.     Bello  dat  signum  rauca  cruentum 

Buccina.     Tum  muros  varia  cinxere  corona  475 

Matronae  puerique  :  vocat  labor  ultimus  omnes. 

Nec  non  ad  templum  summasque  ad  Palladis  arces 

Subvebitur  magna  matrum  regina  caterva, 

Dona  ferens,  juxtaque  comes  Lavinia  virgo, 

Causa  mali  tanti,  oculos  dejecta  decoros.  480 

Succedunt  matres,  et  templum  ture  vaporant, 

Et  maestas  alto  fundunt  de  limine  voces : 

"  Armipotens,  praeses  belli,  Tritonia  virgo, 

"  Frange  manu  telum  Phrygii  praedonia^  et  ipsum 

"  Pronum  sterne  solo,  portisque  effunde  sub  altis.'"       485 

Cingitur  ipse  furens  certatim  in  proelia  Turnus  ; 

Jamque  adeo  Eutulum  tboraca  indutus  ahenis 

Horrebat  squamis,  surasque  incluserat  auro, 

Tempora  nudus  adliuc,  laterique  accinxerat  ensem, 

Fulgebatque  alta  decurrens  aureus  arce  ;  490 

Exsultatque  animis  et  spe  jam  praecipit  bostem  : 

Qualis  ubi  abruptis  fugit  praesepia  vinclis 

Tandem  liber  equus,  campoque  potitus  aperto 

Aut  ille  in  pastus  armentaque  tendit  equarum, 

Aut,  assuetus  aquae  perfundi  flumine  noto,  495 

Emicat,  arrectisque  fremit  cervicibus  alte 

Luxurians,  luduntque  jubae  per  colla,  per  armos. 


262   ^^  AENEIDOS   LIB.    XI. 

Obvia  cui,  Volscoram  acie  comitante,  Camilla 
Occurrit ;  portisque  ab  cquo  regina  sub  ipsis 
Desiluit,  quam  tota  cohors  imitata  relictis  500 

A(l  terram  defluxit  equis ;  tum  talia  fatur : 
'  Turne,  sui  merito  si  qua  est  fiducia  forti, 
'  Audeo  et  Aeneadum  promitto  occurrere  turmae, 
^  Solaque  Tyrrlienos  equites  ire  obvia  contra. 
'  Me  sine  prima  manu  tentare  pericula  belli ;  505 

'  Tu  pedes  ad  muros  subsiste  et  moenia  serva." 
Turnus  ad  baec,  oculos  horrenda  in  virgine  fixus : 
'  0  decus  Italiae,  virgo,  quas  dicere  grates 
•  Quasve  referre  parem  ?  Sed  nunc,  est  omnia  quando 
'  Iste  animus  supra,  mecum  partire  laborem.  510 

^  Aeneas,  ut  fama  fidem  missique  reportant 
'  Exploratores,  equitum  levia  improbus  arma 
'  Praemisit,  quaterent  campos  ;  ipse  ardua  montis 
'  Per  deserta  jugo  superans  adventat  ad  urbem. 
'  Furta  paro  belli  convexo  in  tramite  silvae,  515 

'  Ut  bivias  armato  obsidam  milite  fiiuces. 
'  Tu  Tyrrlienum  equitem  collatis  excipe  signis. 
•'  Tecum  acer  Me^sapus  erit,  turmacque  Latinae 
'  Tiburtique  manus ;  ducis  et  tu  concipe  curam." 
Sic  ait,  et  paribus  Messapum  in  proelia  dictis  520 

Hortatur  sociosque  duces,  et  pergit  in  bostem. 
Est  curvo  anfractu  valles,  accommoda  fraudi 
Armorumque  dolis,  quam  densis  frondibus  atrum 
Urguet  utrimque  latus,  tenuis  quo  semita  ducit, 
Angustaeque  fcrunt  fauccs  aditusque  maligni ;  525 

Hauc  super  in  speculis  suraraoque  in  vertice  montis 
Planities  ignota  jacet,  tutique  recessus, 
Seu  dextra  laevaque  vclis  occurrcre  jiugnae, 
Sive  instare  jugis  et  grandia  volvere  saxa. 
Huc  juvenis  nota  fertur  regione  viarum,  '  530 

Arripuitque  locum  et  silvis  insedit  iniquis. 


AENEIDOS    LTB.    XI,  263 

Velocem  interea  siiperis  in  sedibus  Opim, 
Unam  ex  virginibus  sociis  sacraqiie  caterva, 
Compellabat  et  lias  tristes  Latonia  Toces 
Ore  clabat :  "  Graditur  bellum  ad  crudele  Camilla,      535 
"  0  virgo,  et  nostris  nequidquam  cingitur  armis, 
"  Cara  mihi  ante  alias  :  ncque  enim  novus  iste  Dianae 
"  Venit  amor,  subitaque  animum  dulcedine  movit. 
''  Pulsus  ob  invidiam  regno  viresque  superbas 
"  Priverno  antiqua  Metabus  cum  excederet  urbe  ;        540 
"  Infantem  fugiens  media  inter  proelia  belli 
"  Sustulit  exsilio  comitem,  matrisque  vocavit 
"  Nomine  CasmiLlae,  mutata  parte,  Camillam.  . 
"  Ipse  sinu  prae  se  portans,  juga  longa  petebat 
"  Solorum  nemorum  ;  tela  undique  saeva  premebant,  545 
"  Et  circumfuso  volitabant  milite  Volsci. 
"  Ecce,  fugae  medio  summis  Amasenus  abundans 
"  Spumabat  ripis  :  tantus  se  nubibus  imber 
"  Kuperat.     Ille,  innare  parans,  infantis  amore 
"  Tardatur,  caroque  oneri  timet.     Omnia  secum  550 

"  Versanti  subito  vix  baec  sententia  sedit : 
"  Telum  immane,  manu  valida  quod  forte  gerebat 
"  Bellator,  solidum  nodis  et  robore  cocto, 
"  Huic  natam  libro  et  silvestri  subere  clausam 
"  Implicat,  atque  habilem  mediae  circumligat  hastae.  555 
"  Quam  dextra  iugenti  librans  ita  ad  aethera  fatur : 
"  '  Alma,  tibi  hanc,  nemorum  cultrix,  Latonia  virgo, 
"  '  Ipse  pater  famulam  voveo  ;  tua  prima  per  auras 
"  '  Tela  tenens  supplex  hostem  fugit :  accipe,  testor, 
"  '  Diva  tuam,  quae  nunc  dubiis  committitur  auris.'     560 
"  Dixit,  et  adducto  contortum  hastile  lacerto 
"  Immittit :  sonuere  undae ;  rapidum  super  amnem 
"  Infelix  fugit  in  jaculo  stridente  Camilla. 
''  At  Metabus,  magna  propius  jam  urgente  caterva, 
"  Dat  sese  fluvio,  atque  hastam  cum  virgine  victor      565 


264  AENEIDOS    LIB.    XI. 

"  Gramineo  donum  Triviae  de  cespite  vellit. 

"  Non  illum  tcctis  ullae,  non  moenibus  urbes 

"  Accepere,  neque  ipso  manus  feritate  dedissct  ; 

'■'  Pastorum  et  solis  exegit  montibus  aevum, 

"  Hic  natam  in  dumis  interque  liorrentia  lustra  570 

"Armentalis  equae  mammis  et  lacte  ferino 

"  Nutribat,  teneris  immulgens  ubera  labris. 

"Utque  pedum  primis  infans  vestigia  plantis 

"  Institerat,  jaculo  palmas  armavit  acuto, 

"  Spiculaque  ex  bumero  parvae  suspendit  et  arcum.    575 

"  Pro  crinali  auro,  pro  longae  tegmine  pallae, 

"  Tigridis  exuviae  j)er  dorsum  a  vertice  pendent. 

"  Tela  manu  jam  tum  tcncra  puerilia  torsit, 

"  Et  fundam  tereti  circum  caput  egit  habena, 

"  Strymoniamque  gruem  aut  album  dejecit  olorem.      580 

"  Multae  illam  frustra  Tyrrliena  per  oppida  matres 

"  Optavere  nurum  ;  sola  contenta  Diana 

"  Aeternum  telorum  et  virginitatis  amorem 

"Intemerata  colit.     Vellem  baud  correpta  fuisset 

"  Militia  tali,  conata  lacessere  Teucros :  585 

"  Cara  mihi  comitumque  foret  nunc  uua  mearum. 

"  Verum  age,  quaudoquidem  fatis  urguetur  accrbis, 

"Labcre,  Nympha,  polo,  finesquc  inviso  Latinos, 

"  Tristis  ubi  infausto  committitur  omine  pugna. 

"  Haec  cape,  et  ultricem  pharetra  deprome  sagittam :  590 

"  Ilac,  quicumque  sacrum  violarit  vulnere  corpus, 

"  Tros  Italusve,  mihi  pariter  det  sanguine  j^ocnas. 

"  Post  ego  nube  cava  miserandae  corpus  ct  arma 

"  Inspoliata  feram  tumulo,  patriaeque  reponam." 

Dixit  ;  at  illa  levis  coeli  dehipsa  per  auras  595 

Insonuit,  nigro  circumdata  turbine  corpus. 

At  manus  interea  muris  Trojana  propinquat, 
Etruscique  duccs,  cquitumque  cxercitus  omnis, 
Compositi  numero  in  turinas.     Fremit  acquore  toto 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    XI.  265 

Insultans  sonipes,  et  pressis  pugnat  habenis  GOO 

Huc  obversus  et  huc ;  turn  late  ferreus  liastis 
Horret  ager,  campique  armis  sublimibus  ardent. 
Nec  non  Messapus  contra  celeresque  Latini 
Et  cum  fratre  Coras  et  virsfinis  ala  Camillae 

o 

Adversi  campo  apparent,  hastasque  reductis  605 

Protendunt  longe  dextris  et  spicula  vibrant, 
Adventusque  virimi  fremitusque  ardescit  equorura. 
Jamque  intra  jactuni  teli  prog,ressus  uterque 
Constiterat ;  subito  crumpunt  clamore,  furentcsque 
Exhortantur  equos ;  fundunt  simul  undique  tela  610 

Crebra,  nivis  ritu,  coelumque  obtexitur  umbra. 
Continuo  adversis  Tyrrhenus  et  acer  Aconteus 
Connixi  incurrunt  hastis,  primique  ruinam 
"Dant  sonitu  ingenti,  perfractaque  quadrupedantum 
Pectora  pectoribus  rumpunt.     Excussus  Aconteus       615 
Fulminis  in  morem  aut  tormeuto  ponderis  acti 
Praecipitat  longe,  et  vitam  dispergit  in  auras. 
Extemplo  turbatae  acies,  versique  Latini 
Kejiciunt  parmas  et  equos  ad  moenia  vertunt. 
Troes  agunt ;  princeps  turmas  inducit  Asilas.  620 

Jamque  proi^inquabant  portis  ;  rursusque  Latini 
Clambrem  toUunt,  et  mollia  colla  reflectunt : 
Hi  fugiunt  penitusque  datis  referuntur  habenis. 
Qualis  ubi  alterno  procurrens  gurgite  pontus 
Nunc  ruit  ad  terram,  scopulosque  superjacit  unda        625 
Spumeus,  extremamque  sinu  perfundit  arenam ; 
Nunc  rapidus  retro  atque  aestu  revoluta  resorbens 
Saxa  fugit,  litusque  vado  labente  relinquit. 
Bis  Tusci  Eutulos  egerc  ad  moenia  versos ; 
Bis  rejecti  armis  respectant  terga  tegentes.  630 

Tertia  sed  postquam  congressi  in  proelia,  totas 
Imphcuere  inter  se  acies,  legitque  virum  vir  ; 
Tum  vero  et  gemitus  morientum  et  sanguine  in  alto 
12 


26G  AENEIPOS    LIB.    XI. 

Armaque  corporaqiie  et  permixti  caede  virorum 

Semianimes  volvuntur  cqui,  pugna  aspera  surgit.         635 

Orsiloclius  Kemuli^  quando  ipsum  liorrebat  adire, 

Hastam  intorsit  equo,  ferrumque  sub  aure  reliquit : 

Quo  sonipes  ictu  furit  arduus,  altaque  jactat 

Vulnoris  impatiens  arrecto  pectore  crura : 

Volvitur  ille  excussus  humi.     Catillus  lollan  640 

Ingentemque  animis,  ingentem  cori^ore  et  armis, 

Dejicit  Herminium,  nudo  cui  vertice  fulva 

Caesaries,  nudique  liumeri  ;  nec  vulnera  terrent : 

Tantus  in  arma  patct.     Latos  liuic  liasta  pcr  armos 

Acta  tremit,  duplicatque  virum  transfixa  dolore.  645 

Funditur  ater  ubique  cruor ;  dant  funera  ferro 

Certantes,  j)ulcliramque  petunt  per  vulnera  mortem, 

At  medias  inter  caedcs  cxsultat  Amazon, 

Unum  exserta  latus  pugnae,  pharetrata  Camilla, 

Et  nunc  lcnta  manu  spargens  hastilia  denset,  650 

Nunc  validam  dextra  rapit  indefessa  bipennem  ; 

Aureus  ex  humero  sonat  arcus  et  arma  Dianae. 

Illa  etiam,  si  quando  in  tergum  pulsa  recessit, 

Spicnla  converso  fugientia  dirigit  arcu. 

At  circum  lectae  comites,  Larinaque  virgo  655 

Tullaque  et  aeratam  quatiens  Tarpeia  securim, 

Italides,  quas  ipsa  decus  sibi  dia  Camilla 

Delegit  pacisque  bonas  bellique  ministras  : 

Qaales  Threiciae  quum  flumina  Thermodontis 

Pulsant  ct  pictis  bellantur  Amazones  armis,  660 

Seu  circum  Hippolytcn,  seu  quum  sc  Martia  curru 

Penthesilea  refert,  magnoque  ululante  tumultu 

Feminea  exsultant  lunatis  agmina  peltis. 

Quom  telo  primum,  quem  postremum  aspera  virgo 

Dejicis,  aut  quot  liumi  uKjrientia  corpora  fundis.'*  665 

Euneum  Clytio  primum  patre :  cujus  apertum 

Adverei  longa  trnnsverberat  abiote  pcctus. 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    XI.  267 

Sanguinis  ille  vomens  rivos  cadit,  atqnc  cruentam 

Mandit  humum,  moriensque  suo  se  in  vnlncre  versat. 

Tum  Lirim,  Pagasumque  super,  quorum  alter  liabenas  670 

Sutfosso  revolutus  equo  dum  colligit,  altcr 

Dum  subit  ac  dextram  labcnti  tendit  inermem, 

Praecipites  pariterque  ruunt.     His  addit  Amastrum 

Hippotaden,  sequiturque  incumbcns  eminus  basta        674 

Tereaquc  Harpalycumquc  et  Demo^jboonta  Cbromimque  ; 

Quotque  emissa  manu  contorsit  spicula  virgo,  676 

Tot  Pbrygii  cecidere  viri.     Procul  Ornytus  armis 

Ignotis  et  equo  venator  lapyge  fertur, 

Cui  pellis  latos  humeros  erepta  juvenco 

Pugnatori  operit,  caput  ingens  oris  biatus  680 

Et  malac  texere  bipi  cum  dentibus  albis, 

Agrestisque  manus  armat  spar.us ;  ipse  catervis 

Vertitur  in  mediis,  et  toto  vertice  supra  est. 

Hunc  illa  cxceptum-neque  enim  b^bor  agmine  verso- 

Trajicit,  et  super  baec  inimico  pectore  fatur :  685 

"  Silvis  te,  Tyrrbene,  feras  agitare  putasti  ? 

"  Advenit  qui  vestra  dies  muHcbribus  armis 

"  Verba  redarguerit.     Nomen  tamen  baud  leve  patrum 

"  Manibus  boc  referes,  telo  cecidisse  Camillae." 

Protenus  Orsilocbum  et  Buten,  duo  maxima  Teucrum  690 

Corpora,  sed  Buten  aversum  cuspide  fixit 

Loricam  galeamque  inter,  qua  colla  sedentis 

Lucent,  et  laevo  dependet  parma  lacerto ; 

Orsilocbum  fugiens  magnumque  agitata  per  orbem 

Ebidit  gyro  interior,  sequiturque  sequentem,  695 

Tum  validam  perque  arma  viro  perque  ossa  securim, 

Altior  exsurgens,  oranti  et  multa  precanti 

Congeminat :  vulnus  cabdo  rigat  ora  cerebro. 

Incidit  buic,  subitoque  adspectu  territus  baesit 

Apenninicobie  bellator  filius  Auni,  700 

Haud  Ligurum  extremus,  dum  fallere  fata  sinebant. 


268  AENEIDOS    LIB.    XI. 

Isque,  ubi  se  nullo  jam  cursu  cvadere  pugnae 

Posse  ncquc  instantem  rcginam  avertere  cernit, 

Consilio  versare  dolos  ingressus  et  astu 

Incipit  liaec  :  "  Quid  tam  egregium,  si  femina  forti      705 

''  Fidis  cquo  ?     Dimitte  fugam,  et  te  comminus  accxuo 

'•  Mccum  crcde  solo,  pugnaeque  accinge  pedestri : 

"  Jam  nosccs,  ventosa  ferat  cui  gloria  fraudcm." 

Dixit ;  at  illa  furens  acrique  accensa  dolorc 

Tradit  equuin  comiti,  paribusque  resistit  in  armis,       710 

Ense  pcdes  nudo,  puraque  interrita  parma. 

At  juvenis,  vicisse  dolo  ratus,  avolat  ipse, 

Haud  mora,  conversisque  fugax  aufertur  habenis, 

Quadrupedemque  citum  ferrata  calce  fatigat. 

"  Vane  Ligus  frustraque  animis  elate  supcrbis,  715 

"  Nequidquam  patrias  tentasti  lubricus  artes, 

"  Nec  fraus  te  incolumem  fallaci  pcrfcret  Auno/' 

Haec  fatur  virgo,  et  pernicibus  ignea  plantis 

Transit  equum  cursu,  frenisque  adversa  prebensis 

Congreditur  poenasque  inimico  ex  sanguine  sumit :      720 

Quam  facile  accipiter  saxo  sacer  ales  ab  alto 

Consequitur  pennis  sublimem  in  nube  columbam, 

Comprensaraque  tenet  pcdibusque  cviscerat  uncis ; 

Tum  cruor  et  vulsae  labuntur  ab  aethere  plumae. 

At  non  hacc  nullis  hominum  sator  atque  deorum    725 
Observans  oculis  summo  scdet  altus  Olympo. 
Tyrrhenum  genitor  Tarchonem  in  proelia  saeva 
Suscitat,  et  stimulis  haud  mollibus  injicit  iras. 
Ergo  intcr  caedcs  ccdcntiaque  agmina  Tarchon 
Fcrtur  cquo,  variisque  instigat  vocibus  alas,  730 

Noinine  quemque  vocans,  reficitque  in  proelia  pulsos. 
"  Quis  metus,  o  numquara  dolituri,  o  semper  inertes 
<'  Tyrrlieni,  quae  tanta  anirais  ignavia  vcnit  ? 
"  Fcniina  palantcs  agit  atquc  haec  agmina  vertit  ? 
"  Qiio  fcrrum,  quidve  liacc  gerimus  tcla  irritadextris?  735 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    XI,  269 

"  At  non  in  Venerem  segnes  nocturnaque  bella, 

"  Aut,  ubi  curva  choros  indixit  tibia  Bacchi, 

"  Exspectare  clapes  et  plenae  pocula  mensae- 

"  Hic  amor,  boc  studium-,  dum  sacra  secundus  haruspex 

"  Nuntiet,  ac  lucos  vocet  hostia  pinguis  in  altos."         740 

Haec  eifatus,  equum  in  medios,  moriturus  et  ipse, 

Concitat,  et  Venulo  adversum  se  turbidus  offert, 

Dereptumque  ab  equo  dextra  complectitur  hostem, 

Et  gremium  ante  suum  multa  vi  concitus  aufert, 

Tollitur  in  coelum  clamor,  cunctique  Latini  745 

Convertere  oculos.     Volat  igneus  aequore  Tarchon, 

Arma  virumque  ferens,  tum  summa  ipsius  ab  hasta 

Defringit  ferrum,  et  partes  rimatur  apertas, 

Qua  vulnus  letale  ferat ;  contra  ille  repugnans 

Sustinet  a  jugulo  dextram,  etvim  viribus  exit,  750 

Utque  volans  alte  raptum  quum  fulva  draconem 

Fert  aquila,  implicuitque  pedes,  atque  unguibus  haesit ; 

Saucius  at  serpens  siuuosa  volumina  versat, 

Arrectisque  horret  squamis,  et  sibilat  ore, 

Arduus  insurgens  :  illa  haud  minus  urguet  obunco       755 

Luctantem  rostro,  simul  aethera  verberat  alis  : 

Haud  aliter  praedam  Tiburtum  ex  agmine  Tarchon 

Portat  ovans,     Ducis  exemplum  eventumque  secuti 

Maeonidae  incurrunt.     Tum  fatis  debitus  Arruns 

Velocem  jaculo  et  multa  jjrior  arte  Camillam  7G0 

Circuit,  et,  quae  sit  fortuna  facillima,  tentat. 

Qua  S8  cumque  furens  medio  tulit  agmine  virgo, 

Hac  Arruns  subit  et  tacitus  vestigia  lustrat ; 

Qua  victrix  redit  illa  pedemque  ex  hoste  reportat, 

Hac  juvenis  furtim  celeres  detorquet  habenas.  765 

Hos  aditus,  jamque  hos  aditus  omnemque  pererrat 

Undique  circuitum,  et  certam  quatit  improbus  hastam. 

Forte  sacer  Cybeke  Chloreus,  olimque  sacerdos, 

Insignis  longe  Phrygiis  fulgebat  in  armis. 


270  AENEIDOS    LIB,    XI. 

Spumantemque  agitabat  equum,  quem  pellls  ahenis    770 

In  plumam  squamis  auro  conserta  tegebat ; 

Ipse,  peregrina  ferrugine  clarus  et  ostro, 

Spicula  torquebat  Lycio  Gortynia  cornu ; 

Aureus  ex  humcris  sonat  arcus,  et  aurea  vati  774 

Cassida;  tum  croceam  chlamydemque  sinusquc  crepantes 

Carbaseos  fulvo  in  nodum  collegerat  auro,  776 

Pictus  acu  tunicas  et  barbara  tegmina  crurum. 

Hunc  virgo,  sive  ut  templis  praefigeret  arma 

Troia,  captivo  sive  ut  se  ferret  in  auro, 

Venatrix  unum  ex  omni  certamine  pugnae  780 

Caeca  sequebatur,  totumque  iucauta  pcr  agmen 

Femineo  praedae  et  spoliorum  ardebat  amore : 

Tehim  ex  insidiis  quum  tandem  tempore  capto 

Concitat  et  suj)eros  Arruus  sic  voce  precatur : 

"  Summe  deum,  sancti  custos  Soractis  Apollo,  785 

"  Q^em  primi  cohmus,  cui  pincus  ardor  acervo 

"  Pascitur,  et  medium  freti  pietate  per  ignem 

"  Cultores  multa  premimus  vestigia  pruna, 

"  Da,  pater,  hoc  nostris  aboleri  dedecus  armis, 

"  Omnipotens.     Non  exuvias  pulsaeve  tropaeum  790 

"  Virginis  aut  spoHa  uUa  peto  ;  mihi  cetera  laudem 

"  Facta  ferent :  haec  dira  meo  dum  vulnere  pestis 

"  Pulsa  cadat,  patrias  rcmeabo  inglorius  urbes." 

Audiit  ct  voti  Phoebus  succedere  partem 

Mente  dedit,  partem  volacres  dispersit  in  auras :  795 

Sterneret  ut  subita  turbatam  morte  CamiUam, 

Adnuit  oranti ;  reducem  ut  j^atria  alta  viderct, 

Non  dedit,  inque  Notos  vocem  vcrtere  procellae. 

Ergo,  ut  missa  manu  sonitum  dedit  hasta  per  auras 

Convcrtere  animos  acres  oculosque  tulcrc  800 

Cuncti  ad  rcginam  Volsci.     Nihil  ipsa  nec  aurae 

Ncc  sonitus  memor  aut  venientis  ab  acthere  teli, 

Hasta  sub  exsertam  doucc  peiiata  papillam 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    XI.  271 

Haesit,  virgineumque  alte  bihit  acta  cruorem.         -y 

Concurrunt  trepidae  comites,  dominamque  ruentem     805 

Suscipiunt.     Fugit  ante  omnes  exterritus  Arriins 

Laetitia  mixtoque  metu,  nec  jam  amplius  hastae 

Credere  nec  telis  occurrere  virginis  audet. 

Ac  velut  ille,  prius  quam  tela  inimica  sequantur, 

Continuo  in  montes  sese  avius  abdidit  altos  8i0 

Occiso  pastore  lupus  magnove  juvenco, 

Conscius  audacis  facti,  caudamque  remulcens 

Subjecit  pavitantem  utero,  silvasque  petivit : 

Haud  secus  ex  oculis  se  turbidus  abstulit  Arruns, 

Contentusque  fuga  mediis  se  immiscuit  armis,  815 

Illa  manu  moriens  telum  trahit ;  ossa  sed  inter 

Ferreus  ad  costas  alto  stat  vulnere  mucro. 

Labitur  exsanguis,  labuntur  frigida  leto 

Lumina,  purpureus  quondam  color  ora  reliquit. 

Tum  sic  exspirans  Accam,  ex  aequalibus  unam,  820 

Alloquitur,  fida  ante  alias  quae  sola  Camillae, 

Quicum  partiri  curas,  atque  haec  ita  fatur  : 

'•'  Hactenus,  Acca  soror,  potui ;  nunc  vulnus  acerbum 

"  Conficit,  et  tenebris  nigrescunt  omnia  circum. 

"  Efiuge  et  haec  Turno  mandata  novissima  perfer  :      825 

"  Succedat  pugnae  Trojanosque  arceat  urbe. 

"  Jamque  vale,"     Simul  his  dictis  linquebat  habenas, 

Ad  terram  non  sponte  fluens.     Tum  frigida  toto 

Paullatim  exsolvit  se  corpore,  lentaque  colla 

Et  captum  leto  posuit  caput,  arma  relinquens,  830 

Vitaque  cum  gemitu  fugit  indignata  sub  umbras.  \, 

Tum  vero  immensus  surgens  ferit  aurea  clamor        * 

Sidera :  dejecta  crudescit  pugna  Camilla  ; 

Incurrunt  densi  simul  omnis  copia  Teucrum 

Tyrrhenique  duces  Evandrique  Arcades  alae.  835 

At  Triviae  custos  jam  dudum  in  montibus  Opis 
Alta  scdet  summis,  spcctatquc  interrita  pugnas. 


272  AENEIDOS    LIB.    XI. 

Utque  i")rocul  mcdio  juvcnum  in  clamore  furcntum 

Prospexit  tristi  multatam  morte  Camillam, 

Ingemuitque  deditque  has  imo  pectore  voces  :  840 

"  Heu  nimium,  virgo,  nimium  crudcle  luisti 

"  Supplicium,  Teucros  conata  lacessere  bello  ; 

"  Nec  tibi  desertae  in  dumis  coluisse  Dianam 

"  Profuit,  aut  nostras  humero  gessisse  sagittas. 

'*  Non  tamen  indecorem  tua  te  regina  reliquit         '       845 

"  Extrema  jam  in  morte,  neque  hoc  sine  nomine  letum 

"  Per  gentes  erit,  aut  famam  patieris  inultae : 

"  Nam  quicumque  tuum  violavit  vulnere  corpus, 

"  Morte  luet  mcrita."     Fiiit  ingens  montc  suh  alto 

Kegis  Dercenni  terreno  ex  aggere  bustum  850 

Antiqui  Laurentis,  opacaque  ilice  tectum  : 

Hic  dea  se  j)rimum  rapido  pulcherrima  nisu 

Sistit,  et  Arruntem  tumulo  speculatur  ab  alto. 

Ut  vidit  laetantem  animis  ac  vana  tumentem ; 

"  Cur"  inquit  "  diversus  abis  ?    Huc  dirige  gressum,  855 

''  Huc  periture  veni,  capias  ut  digna  Camillae 

*'  Praemia.     Tune  etiam  telis  moriere  Dianae  ?  " 

Dixit,  et  aurata  volucrem  Threissa  sagittam 

Depromsit  pharetra,  cornuque  infensa  tetendit 

Et  duxit  longe,  donec  curvata  coirent  860 

Inter  se  capita,  et  manibus  jam  tangerct  aequis, 

Laeva  aciem  ferri,  dextra  nervoque  papillam. 

Extemplo  teli  stridorem  aurasque  sonantes 

Audiit  una  Arruns,  hacsitque  in  corpore  ferrum. 

lUum  cxspirantcm  socii  atque  extrema  gementem        865 

Obliti  ignoto  camporum  in  pulverc  linquunt ; 

Opis  ad  aetherium  pennis  aufertur  Olympum. 

Prima  fugit,  domina  amissa,  levis  ala  Camdlae, 
Turbati  fugiunt  Eutuli,  fugit  acer  Atinas, 
Disjectiquc  duces  desolatique  manipli  870 

Tuta  petunt  et  equis  aversi  ad  moenia  tendunt. 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    XI.  273 

Nec  quisquam  mstantes  Teucros  letumquc  ferentcs 

Sustentare  valet  telis,  aut  sistere  contra  ; 

Sed  laxos  referunt  liumeris  lans-uentibus  arcus, 

Quadrupedoque  putrem  cursu  quatit  ungula  campum.  875 

Volvitur  ad  muros  caligine  turbidus  atra 

Pulvis,  et  e  speculis  percussae  pectora  matres 

Femiueum  clamorem  ad  co^li  sidera  tollunt. 

Qui  cursu  portas  primi  irrupere  patentes, 

Hos  inimica  super  mixto  premit  agmine  turba  ;  880 

Nec  miseram  effugiunt  mortem,  sed  limine  in  ipso, 

Moenibus  in  patriis  atque  inter  tuta  domorum 

Confixi  exspifant  animas.     Pars  claudere  portas, 

Nec  sociis  aperire  viam,  nec  moenibus  audent 

Accipere  orantes  ;  oriturque  miserrima  caedes  885 

Defendentum  armis  aditus,  inque  arma  ruentum. 

Exclusi,  ante  oculos  lacrimantumque  ora  parentum, 

Pars  in  praecij)ites  fossas  urgente  ruina 

Volvitur,  immissis  pars  caeca  et  concita  frenis 

Arietat  in  portas  et  duros  objice  postes.  890 

Ipsae  de  muris  summo  certamine  matres,  - 

Monstrat  amor  verus  patriae  -  ut  videre  Camillam, 

Tela  manu  trepidae  jaciunt,  ac  robore  duro 

Stipitibus  ferrum  sudibusque  imitantur  obustis 

Praecipites,  primaeque  mori  pro  moenibus  ardent.        895 

Interea  Turnum  in  silvis  saevissimus  implet 
Nuntius,  et  juveni  ingentem  fert  Acca  tumultum  ; 
Deletas  Volscorum  acies,  cecidisse  Camillam, 
Ingruere  infensos  bostes,  et  Marte  secundo 
Omnia  corripuisse,  metum  jam  ad  moenia  ferri.  900 

lUe  furens  -  et  saeva  Jovis  sic  numina  poscunt  - 
Deserit  obsessos  coUes,  nemora  aspera  Hnquit. 
Vix  e  conspectu  exierat  campumque  tenebat, 
Quum  pater  Aeneas,  saltus  ingressus  apertos, 
Exsuperatque  jugum  silvaque  evadit  opaca.  905 

12* 


274  AENEIDOS    LIB.    XI. 

Sic  ambo  ad  miiros  rapidi  totoque  fcriintur 

Agmine,  nec  longis  inter  se  passibus  absunt. 

Ac  simul  Aeneas  fumantes  pulvere  campos 

Prospexit  longe,  Laurentiaque  agmina  vidit ; 

Et  saevum  Aenean  agnovit  Turnus  in  armis,  910 

Adventumque  pedum  flatusque  audivit  equorum. 

Continuoque  ineant  pugnas  et^proelia  tentent, 

Ni  roseus  fessos  jam  gurgite  Plioebus  Hibero 

Tingat  equos  noctemque  die  labente  reducat. 

Considunt  castris  anto  urbem  et  moenia  vallant.  915 


P.  VIRGILII  MAPvONIS 

AENEIDOS 

LIBER  DUODECIMUS. 


Turnus  ut  infractos  adverso  Marte  Latinos 

Defecisse  videt,  sua  nunc  promissa  reposci, 

Se  signari  oculis  ; .  ultro  implacabilis  ardet, 

AttoUitque  animos.     Poenorum  qualis  in  arvis, 

Saucius  ille  gravi  venantum  vulnere  pectus,  5 

Tum  demum  movet  arma  leo,  gaudetc[ue  comantes 

Excutiens  cervice  toros,  fixumcLue  latronis 

Impavidus  frangit  telum,  et  fremit  ore  cruento  : 

Haud  secus  accenso  gliscit  violentia  Turno. 

Tum  sic  affatur  regem,  atque  ita  turbidus  infit  :  10 

"  Nulla  mora  in  Turno  ;  niliil  est  quod  dicta  retractent 

"  Ignavi  Aeneadae,  nec,  quae  pepigere,  recusent. 

"  Congredior.     Fer  sacra,  pater,  et  concipe  foedus. 

"  Aut  bac  Dardanium  dextra  sub  Tartara  mittam, 

"  Desertorem  Asiae  -  sedeant  spectentc^ue  Latini-,  15 

"  Et  solus  ferro  crimen  commuue  refellam  ; 

"  Aut  liabeat  victos,  cedat  Lavinia  conjux." 

Olli  sedato  respondit  corde  Latinus  : 

"  0  praestans  animi  juvenis,  quantum  ipse  feroci 

"  Virtute  exsuperas,  tanto  me  impensius  aequum  est     20 

"  Consulere  atque  omnes  metuentem  expendere  casus. 


276  AENEIDOS    LIB.    XII. 

"  Sunt  tibi  regna  patris  Dauni,  sunt  oppida  capta 

"  Multa  manu  ;  nec  non  aurumque  animusque  Latino  cst ; 

''  Sunt  aliae  innuptae  Latio  et  Laurentibus  agris, 

"  Nec  genus  indecores  :  sine  me  haec  liaud  moUia  fatu  23 

"  Sublatis  aperire  dolis,  simul  lioc  animo  hauri. 

"  Me  uatam  nulli  veterum  sociare  procorum 

"  Fas  erat,  idque  omnes  divique  hominesque  canebant ; 

"  Victus  amore  tui,  cognato  sanguine  victus, 

"  Conjugis  et  maestae  lacrimis,  vincla  omnia  rupi,  30 

"  Promissam  eripui  genero,  arma  impia  sumsi. 

"  Ex  illo  qui  me  casus,  quae,  Turne,  sequantur 

"  Bella,  vides,  quantos  primus  patiare  labores. 

"  Bis  magna  victi  pugna  vix  urbe  tuemur 

"  Spes  Italas,  recalent  nostro  Tiberina  fluenta  35 

"  Sanguine  adhuc,  carapique  ingentes  ossibus  albent. 

"  Quo  referor  toties  ?  quae  mentem  insania  mutat  ? 

"  Si  Turno  exstincto  socios  sum  adscire  paratus : 

"  Cur  non  incolumi  potius  certamina  tollo  ? 

"  Quid  consanguinei  Kutuli,  quid  cetera  dicet  40 

"  Italia,  ad  mortem  si  te-Fors  dicta  refutet !- 

"  Prodidcrim,  natam  et  connubia  nostra  petentem  ? 

"  Respice  res  bello  varias  ;  miserere  parentis 

"  Longaevi,  quem  nunc  macstum  patria  Ardea  longc 

'■  Dividit."     Haudquaquam  dictis  violentia  Turni  45 

Flectitur,  exsujperat  magis,  aegrescitque  medendo. 

Ut  primum  fari  potuit,  sic  institit  ore  : 

"  Quam  pro  mc  curam  gcris,  hanc  prccor,  optimc,  pro  nie 

"  Deponas,  letumque  sinas  pro  laude  pacisci. 

"  Et  nos  tela,  pater,  ferrumque  haud  debile  dextra        50 

"  Spargimus,  et  nostro  scquitur  de  vulnere  sanguis. 

"  Longe  ilh  dea  matcr  erit,  quae  nube  fugaccm 

"  Feminea  tegat,  et  vanis  scse  occulat  urabris." 

At  regina,  nova  pugnae  contcrrita  sorte, 

Flebat  ct  ardcntcm  croncrMm  morifura  tcnc1>at  :  55 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    XII.  277 

"  Turne,  per  lias  ego  te  lacrimas,  per  si  quis  Amatae 
"  Tangit  lionos  animum-spes  tu  nunc  una,  senectae 
^'  Tu  rcf[uies  miscrae,  decus  impcriumque  Latini 
"  Te  penes,  in  te  omnis  domus  inclinata  recumbit  -, ' 
''  Unum  oro  :  clesiste  manum  committere  Teucris.  60 

"  Qui  te  cumque  manent  isto  certamine  casus, 
"  Et  me,  Turne,  manent:   simul  liaec  invisa  relinquam 
"  Lumina,  nec  generum  Aenean  captiva  videbo." 
Accepit  vocem  lacrimis  Lavinia  matris 
Flagrantes  perfusa  genas,  cui  plurimus  ignem  65 

Subjecit  rubor,  et  calefacta  per  ora  cacurrit. 
Indum  sanguineo  veluti  violavorit  ostro 
Si  quis  ebur,  aut  mixta  rubent  ubi  lilia  multa 
Alba  rosa  :  tales  vii^go  dabat  ore  coloresT 
IUum  turbat  amor,  figitque  in  virgine  vultus.  70 

Ardet  in  arma  magis,  paucisque  afFatur  Amatam  : 
"  Ne,  quaeso,  ne  me  lacrimis  neve  omine  tanto 
"  Prosequere  in  duri  certamina  Martis  euntem, 
"  0  mater :  neque  enim  Turno^^ora  libera  mortis. 
"  Nuntius  haec  Idmon  Phrygio  mea  dicta  tyranno         75 
"  Haud  placitura  refer :  Quum  primum  crastina  coelo 
"  Puniceis  invecta  rotis  Aurora  rubebit ; 
"  Non  Teucros  agat  in  Kutulos  :  Teucrum  arma  quiescant 
"  Et  Eutuli ;  nostro  dirimamus  sanguine  belkim. 
"  lUo  quaeratur  conjux  Lavinia  campo."  80 

Haec  ubi  dicta  dedit  rapidusque  in  tecta  recessit ; 
Poscit  equos,  gaudetque  tuens  ante  ora  frementes, 
Pihimno  quos  ipsa  decus  dedit  Orithyia : 
Qui  candore  nives  anteirent,  cursibus  auras. 
Circumstant  properi  aurigae,  manibusque  lacessunt        85 
Pectora  phiusa  cavis,  efc  colla  comantia  pectunt. 
•  Ipse  dehinc  auro  squalentem  alboque  orichalco 
Circumdat  loricam  humeris  ;  simul  aptat  habendo 
Ensemque  clipeuraque  et  rubrae  cornua  cristae, 


278  AENEIDOS    LIB.    XII. 

Ensein,  quem  Daiino  ignipotens  deus  ipse  parenti  90 

Fecerat  et  Stygia  candentem  tinxerat  unda. 

Exin,  qiiae  mediis  ingenti  annixa  columnae 

Aedibus  adstabat,  validam  vi  corripit  hastam, 

Actoris  Aurunci  spolium,  quassatque  trementem, 

Vociferans  :  "  Nunc,  o  numquam  frustrata  vocatus        95 

"  Hasta  mcos,  nunc  tcmpus  adest :  te  maximus  Actor, 

"  Tc  Turni  nunc  dextra  gerit  :  da  sterncre  corpus 

"  Loricamque  manu  valida  lacerare  revulsam 

'^  Semiviri  Phrygis,  et  focdare  in  pulvere  crines 

"  Vibratos  calido  ferro  myrrhac[ue  madentes."  100 

His  agitur  furiis,  totoque  ardentis  ab  ore 

Scintillae  absistunt,  oculis  micat  acrlbus  ignis : 

Mugitus  veluti  quum  primum  in  proeha  taurus 

Terrificos  ciet  atque  irasci  in  cornua  tentat, 

Arboris  obnixus  trunco,  ventosque  lacessit  105 

Ictibus,  aut  sparsa  ad  pugnam  proludit  arena. 

Ncc  minus  interca  maternis  saevus  in  armis 
Aeneas  acuit  Martcm  et  se  suscitat  ira, 
Oblato  gaudens  componi  foedere  bellum. 
Tum  socios  maestique  mctum  solatur  luli,  110 

Fata  docens,  regique  jubet  responsa  Latino 
Certa  referre  viros  et  pacis  dicere  leges. 

Postera  vix  summos  spargebat  himine  montes 
Orta  dies :  quum  j^rimum  alto  se  gurgitc  toUunt 
Solis  equi,  lucemque  elatis  naribus  efflant :  115 

Campum  ad  certamen  magnae  sub  moenibus  uibis 
Dimensi  Kutuliquc  viri  Teucrlquc  parabant, 
In  medioque  focos  et  dis  communibus  aras 
Gramineas,  aUi  fontemque  ignemque  ferebant, 
Velati  limo  et  verbena  tcmpora  vincti.  120 

Proccdit  lcgio  •Ausonidiim,  pllataque  plenis 
Agmina  sc  fundunt  portis.     Ilinc  Troius  omnis 
Tyrrhcnusquo  ruit  vaiiis  exercitus  nnnip, 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    XII. 


279 


Haud  secus  instructi  ferro,  quam  si  aspera  Martis 

Pugna  vocet.     Nec  non  mediis  in  millibus  ipsi  125 

Ductores  auro  volitant  ostroque  superbi, 

Et  genus  Assaraci  Mnestlieus,  et  fortis  Asilas, 

Et  Messapus  equum  domitor,  Neptunia  proles. 

Utque  dato  signo  spatia  in  sua  quisque  reccssit ; 

Defigunt  telluri  hastas  et  scuta  reclinant.  130 

Tum  studio  efFusae  matres  et  vulgus  inermum 

Invalidique  senes  turres  et  tecta  domorum 

Obsedere,  alii  portis  sublimibus  adstant. 

At  Juno  e  summo,  qui  nunc  Albanus  habetur  - 
Tum  neque  nomen  erat  neque  lionos  aut  gloria  monti-,  135 
Prosniciens  tumulo  campum  adspectabat  et  ambas 
Laurentum  Troumque  acies  urbemque  Latini. 
Extemplo  Turni  sic  est  affata  sororem, 
Diva  deam,  stagnis  quae  fluminibusque  sonoris 
Praesidet-bunc  illi  rex  aetlieris  altus  bonorem  140 

Jupiter  erepta  pro  virginitate  sacravit  -  : 
"  Nympba,  decus  fluviorum,  animo  carissima  nostro, 
"  Scis,  ut  te  cunctis  unam,  quaecumque  Latinae 
"  Magnanimi  Jovis  ingratum  adscendere  cubile, 
"  Praetulerim,  coelique  libens  in  parte  locarim  :  145 

"  Disce  tuum,  ne  me  incuses,  Juturna,  dolorem. 
"  Qua  visa  est  fortuna  pati,  Parcaeque  sinebant 
"  Cedere  re^  Latio,  Turnum  et  tua  moenia  texi ; 
"  Kunc  juvenem  imparibus  video  concurrere  fatis, 
"  Parcarumque  dies  et  vis  inimica  propinquat.  150 

"  Non  pugnam  adspicere  banc  oculis,  non  foedera  possura ; 
"  Tu,  pro  germano  si  quid  praesentius  audes, 
"  Perge  :  decet.     Forsan  miseros  meliora  sequentur." 
Vix  ea,  quum  lacrimas  oculis  Juturna  profudit, 
Terque  quaterque  manu  pectus  percussit  honestum.     155 
"  Non  lacrimis  hoc  tempus  "  ait  Saturnia  Juno  ; 
"  Accelera,  et  fratrem,  si  qnis  modus,  eripe  morti, 


280  AENEIDOS    LIB.    XII. 

"  Aiit  tu  bella  cie,  conceptumc|iie  cxcute  foedus. 
"  Auctor  ego  audendi."     Sic  exhortata  reliquit 
Incertam  et  tristi  turbatam  vulnere  mentis.  16C 

Interea  reges  —  ingenti  mole  Latinus 
Quadrijugo  veiiitur  curru,  cui  tempora  circum 
Aurati  bis  sex  radii  fulgentia  cingunt, 
Solis  avi  specimen ;   bigis  it  Turnus  in  albis,   . 
Bina  manu  lato  crispans  liastilia  ferro.  165 

Hinc  pater  Aeneas,  Eomanae  stirpis  origo, 
Sidereo  flagrans  clipeo  et  coelestibus  armis, 
Et  juxta  Ascanius,  magnae  spes  altera  Eomae, 
Procedunt  castris  ;  puraque  in  veste  sacerdos 
Setigcji  fetum  suis  intonsamque  bide-ntem  170 

Attulit,  admovitque  pecus  flagrantibus  aris. 
Illi  ad  surgentcm  conversi  lumina  solcm 
Dant  fruges  manibus  salsas,  et  tempora  ferro 
Summa  notant  pecudum,  paterisque  altaria  libant 
Tum  jmis  Acneas  stricto  sic  ense  precatur  :  175 

"  Esto  nunc  Sol  testis  et  liaec  mihi  Terra  vocanti, 
''  Quam  propter  tantos  potui  perferre  labores, 
"  Et  Patcr  omnipotens,  et  tu  Saturnia  conjux, 
"  Jam  melior,  jam,  diva,  prccor,  tuque  inclyte  IMavors, 
"  Cuncta  tuo  qui  bella,  pater,  sub  numine  torques ;     180 
"  Fontesque  Eluviosque  voco,  quaeque  aetheris  alti 
"  Eeligio,  et  quae  caeruleo  sunt  numina  ponto : 
"  Cesserit  Ausonio  si  fors  victoria  Turno  ; 
"  Convenit,  Evandri  victos  discedere  ad  urbem, 
"  Cedct  lulus  agris,  nec  post  arma  ulUi  rebellcs  185 

"  Aeneadac  referent,  ferrove  haec  regna  lacessent. 
"  Sin  nostrum  adnuerit  nobis  Victoria  Martem  - 
"  Ut  potius  reor,  ct  potius  di  numine  firmcnt-  ; 
"  Non  ego  nec  Teiicris  Italos  parcre  jubebo, 
"  Ncc  mihi  rcgna  peto  ;  paribus  sc  legibus  ambae        1 90 
"  Invictae  gentos  aetdrna  in  foedera  mittant. 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    XII.  2SJ 

"  Sacra  deosque  dabo  ;  socer  arma  Latinus  tabeto, 

"  Imperium  solemne  socer  ;  mihi  moenia  Tencri 

"  Constituent,  urbiquo  daLit  Lavinia  nomen." 

Sic  prior  Aeneas  ;  sequitur  sic  dciiKlo  Latinus,  195 

Suspiciens  coelum,  tenditque  ad  sidera  dextram : 

"  Haec  eadem,  Aenea,  Terram,  Mare,  Sidera,  juro,     . 

"  Latonaeque  genus  duplex,  Janumque  bifrontem, 

"  Vimque  deum  inferuam  et  duri  sacraria  Ditis. 

"  Audiat  liacc  Genitor,  qui  foedera  fulmine  sancit.       200 

'•'  Tango  aras,  medios  ignes  et  numina  testor  : 

"  Nulla  dies  pacem  lianc  Italis  nec  foedera  rumpet, 

"  Quo  res  cumque  cadent ;  nec  me  vis  ulla  volentem 

"  Avertet ;  non,  si  teliurem  cffundat  in  undas, 

"  Diluvio  miscens,  coelumque  in  Tartara  solvat :  205 

"  Ut  sceptrum  lioc  "-  dextra  sceptrum  nam  forte  gerebat  - 

"  Numquam  fronde  levi  fundet  virgulta  nec  umbras, 

"  Quum  semel  in  silvis  imo  de  stirpe  recisum 

"  Matre  caret,  posuitque  comas  et  bracbia  ferro, 

"  Olim.arbos,  nunc  artificis  manus  aere  decoro  210 

"  Inclusit,  patribusque  dedit  gestare  Latinis." 

Talibus  inter  se  firmabant  foedera  dictis 

Conspectu  in  medio  procerum  ;  tum  rite  sacratas 

In  flammam  jugulant  pecudes,  et  viscera  vivis 

Eripiunt,  cumulantque  oneratis  lancibus  aras.  215 

At  vero  Rutulis  impar  ea  pugna  videri 
Jamdudum  et  vario  misceri  pectora  motu, 
Tum  magis,  ut  propius  cernunt  non  viribus  aequis. 
Adjuvat  incessu  tacito  progressus  et  aram 
Suppliciter  venerans  demisso  lumine  Turnus,  220 

Tabentesque  genae  et  juvenali  in  corpore  pallor. 
Quem  simul  ac  Juturna  soror  crebrescere  vidit 
Sermonem  et  vulgi  variare  labantia  corda  ; 
In  medias  acies,  formam  assimulata  Camerti, 
Cui  genus  a  proavis  ingens  clarumque  paternae  225 


282  *  AENEIDOS   LIB.    XII. 

Nomen  erat  virtutis,  et  ipse  acerrimus  armis, 

lu  mcdias  dat  sese  acies,  liaud  nescia  rerum, 

Rumoresque  sorit  varios  ac  talia  falur : 

"  Non  pudet,  o  Rutuli,  pro  cunctis  talibus  unam 

"  Objectare  animam  ?     Numerone  an  viribus  aequi      230 

"  Non  sumus  ?     En,  omnes  et  Troes  et  Arcades  hi  sunt 

"  Fatalisque  manus,  infensa  Etruria  Turno. 

"  Vix  liostem,  alterni  si  congrediamur,  liabemus. 

"  Ille  quidem  ad  suj^eros,  quorum  se  devovet  aris. 

"  Succedet  fama,  vivusque  per  ora  feretur  ;  235 

"  Nos  patria  amissa  dominis  parore  superbis 

"  Cogemur,  qui  nunc  lenti  consedimus  arvis." 

Talibus  incensa  est  juvenum  sententia  dictis 

Jam  magis  atque  magis,  serpitquc  per  agmina  murmur; 

Ipsi  Laurentes  mutati  ipsique  Latini,  240 

Qui  sibi  jam  requiem  pugnae  rebusque  salutem 

Sperabant,  nunc  arma  volunt  foedusque  precantur 

Infectum  et  Turni  sortem  miserantur  iniquam. 

His  aliud  majus  Jutnrna  adjungit  et  alfo 

Dat  signum  coelo,  quo  non  praesentius  ullum  245 

Turbavit  mentes  Italas,  monstroque  fefellit. 

Namque  volans  rubra  fulvus  Jovis  ales  in  acthra 

Litoreas  agitabat  aves  turbamque  sonantem 

Agminis  ah'geri,  subito  quum  lapsus  ad  undas 

Cycnum  excellentem  pedibus  rapit  imjDrobus  uncis.      250 

Arrexere  animos  Itali,  cunctacque  volucres 

Convertunt  clamore  fugam  -  mirabile  visu-, 

Aetheraque  obscurant  pennis,  hostemque  per  auras 

Facta  nube  premunt,  donec  vi  victus  et  ipso 

Pondere  defecit,  praedamque  ex  unguibus  ales  255 

Projccit  fluAdo,  penitusque  in  nubila  fugit. 

Tum  vero  augurium  Rutuh  elamore  salutant, 

Expediuntquc  manus,  primusquc  Tokimnius  augur 

"  Hoc  erat,  hoc,  votis"  inquit  "  quod  saepe  pctivi: 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    XII.  283 

"  Accipio,  agnoscoque  deos.     Me,  me  duce  ferrum       26G 

"  CorripitG,  o  miseri,  quos  improbus  advena  bello 

"  Territat,  invalidas  ut  aves,  et  litora  vestra 

"  Vi  populat ;  pctet  ille  fugam,  penitusque  profundo 

"  Vela  dabit.     Vos  unanimi  densete  catervas, 

"  Et  regem  vobis  pugna  defendite  raptum."  265 

Dixit,  et  adversos  telum  contorsit  in  iiostes 

Procurrens  :  sonitum  dat  stridula  cornus,  et  auras 

Certa  secat.     Simul  hoc,  simul  ingens  clamor,  et  omnes 

Turbati  cunei,  calefactaque  corda  tumultu. 

Hasta  volans,  ut  forte  novem  pulclierrima  fratrum       270 

Corpora  constiterant  contra,  quos  fida  crearat 

Una  tot  Arcadio  conjux  Tyrrhena  Gylippo, 

Horum  unum  ad  mcdium,  teritur  qua  sutilis  alvo 

Balteus  et  laterum  juncturas  fibula  mordet, 

Egregium  forma  juvenem  et  fulgentibus  armis,  275 

Transadigit  costas,  fulvaque  eflfundit  arena. 

At  fratres,  animosa  phalanx  accensaque  lactu, 

Pars  gladios  stringunt  manibus,  pars  missile  ferrum 

Corripiunt,  caecique  ruunt.     Quos  agmina  contra 

Procurrunt  Laurentum ;  hinc  densi  rursus  inundant    280 

Troes  Agyllinique  et  pictis  Arcades  armis. 

Sic  omnes  amor  unus  habet  decernere  ferro. 

Diripuere  aras ;  it  toto  turbida  coelo 

Tempestas  telorum,  ac  ferreus  ingruit  imber, 

Craterasque  focosque  ferunt.     Eugit  ipse  Latinus,       285 

Pulsatos  referens  infecto  foedere  divos. 

Infrenant  alii  currus,  aut  corpora  saltu 

Subjiciunt  in  equos,  et  strictis  ensibus  adsunt. 

Messapus  regem  regisquc  insigne  gerentem 

Tyrrhenum  Aulesten,  avidus  confundere  foedus,  290 

Adverso  proterret  equo.     Ruit  ille  recedens, 

Et  miser  oppositis  a  tcrgo  involvitur  aris 

In  caput  inque  humeros  ;  at  fervidus  advolat  hasta 


284  AENEIDOS   LIB.    XII. 

Messapus,  teloque  orantem  multa  trabali 

Dcsuper  altus  equo  graviter  ferit,  atque  ita  fatur :        295 

"  Hoc  liabet,  haec  nielior  magnis  data  victima  divis."     • 

Concurrunt  Itali,  spoliantque  calcntia  membra. 

Obvius  ambustum  torrem  Corynaeus  ab  ara 

Corripit,  et  venienti  Ebuso  plagamque  ferenti 

Occupat  os  flammis  :  olli  ingcns  barba  reluxit,  300 

Nidoremque  ambusta  dedit.     Super  ipse  secutus 

Caesariem  laeva  turbati  corripit  hostis, 

Impressoque  genu  nitens  terrae  applicat  ipsum : 

Sic  rigido  latus  enso  ferit.     Podalirius  Alsum, 

Pastorem  priraaque  acie  per  tela  ruentem,  305 

Ense  sequens  nndo  superimminet ;  ille  securi 

Adversi  frontem  raediam  mentumque  reducta 

Disjicit,  et  sparso  late  rigat  arma  cruore. 

Olli  dura  quies  oculos  et  ferreus  urget 

Somnus,  in  aeternam  clauduntur  lumina  noctem.  310 

At  pius  Aeneas  dextram  tendebat  inermem. 

Nudato  capite,  atque  suos  clamore  vocabat : 

"  Quo  ruitis,.  quaeve  ista  repens  discordia  surgit  ?■ 

"  0  cobibete  iras  !     Ictum  jam"  foedus  et  omnes 

"  Compositae  leges:  mihi  jus  concurrere  soli:  .  315 

"  Me  sinite,  atque  auferte  metus.     Ego  foedera  faxo 

"  Firma  manu:  Turnum  debent  haec  jam  mihi  sacra/' 

Has  inter  voccs,  media  intcr  talia  verba, 

Ecce,  viro  stridens  alis  allapsa  sagitta  est, 

Incertum,  qua  pulsa  manu,  qno  turbine  adacta,  320 

Quis  tantam  Kutulis  hiudem,  casusne  deusne, 

Attulerit :  prcssa  est  insignis  gloria  facti, 

Nec  sese  Aeneae  jactavit  vulnere  quisquam. 

Turnus,  ut  Aenean  cedentem  cx  agmine  vidit 
Turbatosque  duccs,  subita  spc  fervidus  ardet  :  325 

Poscit  equos  atque  arma  simul,  saltuque  superbus 
Emicat  in  cuiTum  ct  manibus  molitur  habenas. 


AENEIDOS    LTB.    XII.  ^S.O 

Multa  virum  volitans  dat  fortia  corpora  lcto, 
Semineces  volvit  nniltos,  aut  agmina  curru 
Proterit,  aiit  raptas  fiigientibus  ingerit  hastas.  330 

Qualis  apud  gelidi  quiim  fiumina  concitus  Hebri 
Sanguineus  Mavors  clipeo  intonat  atque  furentes 
Bella  movens  immittit  equos ;  illi  aequore  aperto 
Ante  Notos  Zepliyrumque  volant,  gemit  ultima  pulsu 
Thraca  pedum,  circiTTnque  atrae  Formidinis  ora  335 

Iraeque  Insidiaeque,  dei  comitatus,  aguntur : 
Talis  equos  alacer  media  inter  proelia  Turnus 
Fumantes  sudore  qnatit,  miseraLile  caesis 
Hostibus  insultans  ;  spargit  rapida  ungula  rores 
Sanguineos,  mixtaque  cruor  calcatur  arena.        [q.i^e,    340 
Jamque  neci  Sthenelumque  dedit  Thamyrimque  Pholum- 
Hunc  congressus  et  hunc,  illum  eminus ;  eminus  ambo 
Imbrasidas,  Glaucum  atque  Laden,  quos  Imbrasus  ipse 
Nutrierat  Lycia,  paribusque  ornaverat  armis,. 
Vel  confcrre  manuin,  vel  equo  praevertere  ventos.         345 
Parte  alia  media  Eumedes  in  proelia  fertur, 
Antiqui  proles  bello  praeclara  Dolonis, 
Komine  avum  referens,  animo  manibiisque  parentem, 
Qiii  quondam,  castra  ut  Danaum  speculator  adiret, 
Ausus  Pelidae  pretium  sibi  poscere  currus  ;  350 

Illum  Tydides  alio  pro  talibus  ausis 
Affecit  prctio,  neque  equis  adspirat  AchilKs. 
Hiinc  procul  ut  campo  Turnus  prospexit  aj^erto, 
Ante  levi  jaculo  longum  per  inane  secutus, 
Sistit  equos  bijuges  et  curru  desilit,  atquc  355 

Semianimi  lapsoque  supervenit,  et,  pcde  collo 
Impresso,  dextrae  mucronem  extorquct  et  alto 
Fulgentem  tinguit  jugulo,  atque  haec  insuper  addit : 
"  En,  agros  et,  qiiam  bello,  Trojane,  petisti, 
"  Hesperiam  metire  jacens  :  haec  praemia,  qui  me       360 
'  Ferro  ausi  tentare,  ferunt ;  sic  moenia  condunt." 


28G  AENEIDOS    LIB.    XII. 

Huic  comitcm  Asbutcn  conjccta  cuspide  mittit, 

Chlorcaque  Sybarimquc  Darotaque  Thersiloclmmquyj 

Et  sternacis  equi  lapsum  cervice  Thymoeten. 

Ac  velut  Edoni  Borcae  quum  spiritus  alto  365 

Insonat  Aegaeo  sequiturque  ad  litora  fiuctus, 

Qua  venti  incubucro,  fugam  dant  nubila  coelo : 

Sic  Turno,  quacumque  viam  secat,  agmina  cedunt 

Conversaeque  ruunt  acies ;  fert  impetus  ipsum, 

Et  cristam  adverso  curru  quatit  aura  volantem.  370 

Non  tulit  instantem  Phegeus  animisque  frementem ; 

Objecit  sese  ad  currum,  et  spumantia  frenis 

Ora  citatorum  dextra  detorsit  equorum. 

Dum  trahitur  j)endetque  jugis,  hunc  lata  rctectum 

Lancea  consequitur,  rumpitque  infixa  bilicem  375 

Loricam  et  summum  degustat  vulnere  corpus. 

IUe  tamen  clipeo  objecto  conversus  in  hostem 

Ibat,  et  auxilium  ducto  mucrone  petebat : 

Cum  rota  praecipitem  et  procursu  concitus  axis 

Impulit  effunditque  solo,  Turnusque  secutus  380 

Imam  inter  galeam  summi  thoracis  et  oras 

Abstulit  ense  caput,  trimcumque  reliquit  arenae. 

Atque  ea  dum  campis  victor  dat  funera  Turnus ; 
Interea  Aenean  Mnestheus  et  fidus  Achates 
Ascaniusque  comes  castris  statuere  cruentum,  385 

Alternos  longa  nitentem  cuspide  gressus. 
Saevit,  et  infracta  luctatur  arundine  telum 
Eripere,  auxilioque  viam,  quae  proxima,  poscit : 
Ense  secent  lato  vulnus,  telique  latebram 
Ptescindant  penitus,  sescque  in  bolla  remittant.  390 

Jamque  aderat  Phoebo  ante  alios  dilectus  lapis 
lasides,  acri  quondam  cui  captus  amore 
Ipse  suas  artes,  sua  muncra,  laetus  Apollo 
Augurium  citharamquc  dabat  celeresque  sagittas  ; 
Ille,  ut  depositi  proferret  fata  parentis,  395 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    XII.  287 

Scire  potestates  herbarum  usumque  medencU 

Maluit  et  mutas  agitare  inglorius  artes. 

Stabat  acerba  fremens,  ingentem  nixus  in  hastam, 

Aeneas,  magno  juvenum  et  maerentis  luli 

Concursu  lacrimisque  immobilis.     Ille  retorto  400 

Paeonium  in  morem  senior  succinctus  amictu, 

Multa  manu  medica  Phoebique  potentibus  herbis 

Nequidquam  trepidat,  nequidquam  spicula  dextra 

Sollicitat,  prensatque  tenaci  forcipe  ferrum. 

Nulla  viam  Fortuna  regit,  nihil  auctor  Apojlo  405 

Subvenit ;  et  saevus  campis  magis  ac  magis  horror 

Crebrescit,  propiusque  mahim  est.     Jam  pulvere  coelum 

Stare  vident,  subeuntque  equites,  et  spicula  castris 

Densa  cadunt  mediis;  it  tristis  ad  aethera  clamor 

Bellantum  juvenum  et  duro  sub  Marte  cadentum.        410 

Hic  Venus,  indigno  nati  concussa  dolore, 

Dictamnum  genetrix  Cretaea  carj^sit  ab  Ida, 

Puberibus  caulem  foHis  et  fiore  comantem 

Purpureo  :  non  illa  feris  incognita  capris 

Gramina,  quum  tergo  volucres  haesere  sagittae.  415 

Hoc  Venus,  obscuro  faciem  circumdata  nimbo, 

Detulit :  hoc  fusum  labris  splendentibus  amnem 

Inficit,  occulte  medicans,  spargitque  sahibres 

Ambrosiae  succos  et  odoriferam  panaceam, 

Fovit  ea  vulnus  lympha  longaevus  lapis  420 

Ignorans,  subitoque  omnis  de  corpore  fugit 

Quippe  dolor,  omnis  stetit  imo  vulnere  sanguis ; 

Jamque  secuta  manum  nuUo  cogente  sagitta 

Excidit,  atque  novae  rediere  in  pristina  vires. 

"  Arma  citi  properate  viro  !     Quid  statis  ?  "  lapis       425 

Conclamat,  primusque  animos  accendit  iu  hostem. 

"  Non  haec  humanis  opibus,  non  arte  magistra 

"  Proveniunt,  neque  te,  Aenea,  mea  dextera  servat  ; 

'•  Major  agit  deus  atque  opera  ad  majora  remittit." 


288  AENEIDOS    LIB.    XII. 

Ille  avidus  pugnae  suras  incluserat  auro  430 

Hinc  atque  hinc,  oditque  moras  hastamque  coruscat. 

Postquam  liabilis  lateri  clipeus  loricaque  tergo  est ; 

Ascanium  fusis  circum  complectitur  armis, 

Summaque  per  galeam  delibans  oscula  fatur  : 

"  Disce,  puer,  virtutem  ex  me  verumque  laborem,        435 

"  Fortunam  ex  aliis.     Nanc  te  mea  dextera  bcllo 

''  Defensum  dabit,  ct  magna  inter  praemia  ducet. 

"  Tu  facito,  mox  quum  matura  adolcverit  aetas, 

"  Sis  memor,  et  te,  animo  rcpctentem  exempla  tuorum, 

"  Et  pater  Aencas  et  avunculus  excitet  Hector."  440 

Haec  ubi  dicta  dedit,  portis  sese  extulit  ingens, 
Telum  immane  manu  quatiens ;  simul  agmine  denso 
Antheusquc  Mnestheusque  ruunt,  omnisquo  relictis 
Turba  fluit  castris.     Tum  caeco  pulvere  campus 
Miscetur,  pulsuque  pedum  tremit  excita  tellus.  445 

Vidit  ab  adverso  venientes  aggere  Turnus, 
Videre  Ausonii,  geiidusque  per  ima  cucurrit 
Ossa  tremor ;  prima  ante  omnes  Juturna  Latinos 
Audiit  agnovitque  sonum,  et  tremefacta  refugit. 
lUe  volat,  campoque  atrum  rapit  agmen  aperto.  450 

Qualis  ubi  ad  terras  abrupto  sidere  nimbus 
It  mare  per  medium  ;  miseris,  heu,  praescia  longe 
Horrescunt  corda  agricolis  ;  dabit  ille  ruinas 
Arboribus  stragemque  satis,  ruet  omnia  late ; 
Ante  volant  sonitumque  ferunt  ad  litora  venti :  455 

Talis  in  adversos  ductor  Khoeteius  hostes 
Agmen  agit ;  densi  cuncis  sc  quisque  coactis  ' 

Agglomerant.     Ferit  cnse  gravem  Thymbraeus  Osirim, 
Archetium  Mnestheus,  Epulonem  obtruncat  Achates, 
Uftmtcmque  Gyas  ;  cadit  ipse  Toluranius  augur,  460 

Primus  in  adversos  tclum  qui  torserat  hostes. 
ToUitur  in  coelum  clamor,  versique  vicissim 
Pulverulenta  fufjja  Rutuli  dant  terga  per  agros. 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    XII.  289 

Ipse  neque  aversos  dignatur  sternere  morti, 
Nec  pede  congressos  aequo,  nec  tela  ferentes  465 

Insequitur ;  solum  densa  in  caligine  Turnum 
Vestigat  lustrans,  solum  in  certamina  poscit. 
Hoc  concussa  metu  mentem  Juturna  virago 
Aurigam  Turni  media  inter  lora  Metiscum 
Excutit,  et  longe  lapsum  temone  relinquit ;  470 

Ipsa  subit,  manibusque  undantes  flectit  habenas, 
Cuncta  gerens,  vocemque  et  corpus  et  arma  Metisci 
Nigra  velut  magnas  domini  quum  divitis  aedes 
Pervolat  et  pennis  alta  atria  lustrat  hirundo, 
Pabula  parva  legens  nidisque  loquacibus  escas,  *475 

Et  nuuc  porticibus  vacuis,  n-unc  bumida  circum 
Stagna  sonat :  similis  medios  Juturna  per  bostes 
Fertur  equis,  rapidoque  volans  obit  omnia  curru  ; 
Jamque  bic  germanum,  jamque  bic  ostentat  ovantem, 
Nec  conferre  manum  patitur,  volat  avia  longe,  480 

Haud  minus  Aeneas  tortos  legit  obvius^orbes, 
Vestigatque  virum  et  disjecta  per  agmina  magna 
Voce  vocat.     Quoties  oculos  conjecit  in  bostem, 
Abpedumque  fugam  cursu  tentavit  equorum  ; 
Aversos  toties  currus  Juturna  retorsit.     ^  485 

Heu,  quid  agat .?     Vario  nequidquam  fluctuat  aestu, 
Diversaeque  vocant  animum  in  contraria  curae. 
Huic  Messapus,  uti  laeva  duo  forte  gerebat 
Lenta,  levis  cursu,  praefixa  bastilia  ferro, 
Horum  unum  certo  contorquens  dirigit  ictu.  490 

Substitit  Aeneas,  et  se  collcgit  in  arma, 
Poplite  subsidens  ;  apicem  tamen  incita  summum 
Hasta  tulit,  summasque  excussit  vertice  cristas. 
Tum  vero  assurgunt  irae,  insidiisque  subactus, 
Diversos  ubi  sentit  equos  currumque  referri ;  4^95 

Multa  Jovem  et  laesi  testatus  foederis  aras, 
Jam  tandem  invadit  mcdios,  et  Marte  secundo 
Vi 


290  AENEIDOS    LIB.    XII. 

Terribilis  saevam  nullo  discrimine  caedem 

Suscitat,  irarumque  omnes  effundit  habenas. 

Quis  mihi  nunc  tot  acerba  deus,  quis  carmine  caedes  500    • 

Diversas  obitumque  ducum,  quos  aequore  toto 

Inque  vicem  nunc  Turnus  agit,  nunc  Troius  heros, 

Expediat  ?  tanton'  placuit  concurrere  motu, 

Jupiter,  aeterna  gentes  in  pace  futuras  ? 

Aeneas  Eutulum  Sucronem-ea  prima  ruentes  505 

Pugna  loco  statuit  Teucros-haud  multa  morantem 

Excipit  in  latus  et,  qua  fata  celerrima,  crudum 

Transadigit  costas  et  crates  pectoris  ensem. 

Turnus  equo  dejectum  Amycum  fratremque  Diorem 

Congressus  pedes,  hunc  venientem  cuspide  longa,         510 

Hunc  mucrone  ferit,  curruque  abscisa  duorum 

Suspendit  capita  et  rorantia  sanguine  portat. 

IUe  Talon  Tanaimque  neci  fortemque  Cethegum, 

Tres  uno  congressu,  et  maestum  mittit  Onyten, 

Nomine  Echionium  matrisque  genus  Peridiae  ;  515 

Hic  fratres  Lycia  missos  et  Apollinis  agris, 

Et  juvenem  exosum  nequidquam  bella  Menoeten, 

Arcada,  piscosae  cui  circum  flumina  Lernae 

Ars  fuerat  pauperque  domus,  nec  nota  potentum 

Munera,  conductaque  pater  tellure  serebat.  520 

Ac  velut  immissi  diversis  partibus  ignes 

Arentem  in  silvam  ct  virgulta  sonantia  lauro, 

Aut  ubi  decursu  rapido  de  montibus  altis 

Dant  sonitum  spumosi  amnes  et  in  aequora  currunt, 

Quisque  suum  poj^ulatus  iter :  non  segnius  ambo         525 

Aeneas  Turnusquc  ruunt  per  proelia ;  nunc,  nunc 

Fluctuat  ira  intus,  rumpuntur  nescia  vinci 

Pcctora ;  nunc  totis  in  vulncra  viribus  itur. 

Murranum  hic,  atavos  et  avoriim  antiqua  sonantem 

Nomina,  per  regesque  actum  geuus  omne  Latinos,        530 

Praecipitem  scopulo  atquc  ingentis  turbino  saxi 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    XII.  291 

» 

Excutit  effunditque  solo  :  liunc  lora  et  juga  subter 

Provolvere  rotae  ;  crebro  super  ungula  pulsu 

Incita  nec  domini  memorum  proculcat  equorum. 

Ille  ruenti  Hyllo  animisque  immane  frementi  535 

Occurrit,  telumque  aurata  ad  tempora  torquet : 

Olli  per  galeam  fixo  stetit  hasta  cerebro. 

Dextera  nec  tua  te,  Graium  fortissime,  Cretheu, 

Eripuit  Turno  ;  nec  di  texere  Cupencum, 

Aenea  vcniente,  sui :  dedit  obvia  ferro  540 

Pectora,  nec  misero  clipei  mora  profuit  aerei. 

Te  quoque  Laurentes  viderunt,  Aeole,  campi 

Oppetere  et  late  terram  consternere  tergo  : 

Occidis,  Argivae  quem  non  potuere  pbalanges 

Sternere,  nec  Priami  regnorum  eversor  Acbilles ;  545 

Hic  tibi  mortis  erant  metae,  domus  alta  sub  Ida, 

Lyrnesi  domus  alta,  solo  Laurente  sepulcrum. 

Totae  adeo  conversae  acies,  omnesque  Latiui, 

Omnes  Dardanidae,  Mnestheus,  acerque  Serestus, 

Et  Messapus  equum  domitor,  et  fortis  Asilas,  550 

Tuscorumque  phalanx,  Evandrique  Arcades  alae, 

Pro  §e  quisque  viri  summa  nituntur  opum  vi : 

Nec  mora,  nec  requies  ;  vasto  certamine  tendunt. 

Hic  mentem  Aeneae  genetrix  pulcherrima  misit, 
Iret  ut  ad  muros,  urbique  adverteret  agmen  555 

Ocius  et  subita  turbaret  clade  Latinos. 
Ille,  ut  vestigans  diversa  per  agmina  Turnum 
Huc  atque  huc  acies  circumtulit,  adspicit  urbem 
Immunem  tanti  belli  atque  impune  quietam. 
Continuo  pugnae  accendit  majoris  imago  :  560 

Mnesthea  Sergestumque  vocat  fortemque  Serestum 
Ductores,  tumulumque  capit,  quo  cetera  Teucrilm 
Concurrit  legio,  nec  scuta  aut  spicula  densi 
Deponunt.     Celso  medius  stans  aggere  fatur : 
"  Nec  qua  meis  esto  dictis  mora  -  Jupiter  hac  stat-,     565 


292  AENEIDOS    LIU.    XII. 

# 

"  Neu  quis  ob  inceptum  subitum  mihi  segnior  ito 
"  Urbem  liodie,  causam  belli,  regua  ipsa  Latini, 
"  Ni  frenum  accipere  et  victi  parere  fatentur, 
"  Eruam,  et  aequa  solo  fumantia  culmina  ponam. 
"  Scilicet  exspectem,  libeat  dum  proelia  Turno  57C 

"  Nostra  pati,  rursusque  velit  concurrere  victus  ? 
"  Hoc  caput,  0  cives,  liaec  belli  summa  nefandi. 
"  Ferte  faces  propere,  foedusque  rejioscite  flammis  !  " 
Dixerat,  atque  animis  pariter  certantibus  omnes 
Dant  cuneum,  densaque  ad  muros  mole  feruntur.         575 
Scalae  improviso,  subitusque  apparuit  ignis. 
Discurrunt  alii  ad  portas,  primosque  trucidant  ; 
Ferrum  alii  torquent  et  obumbrant  aetliera  telis. 
Ipse  inter  primos  dextram  sub  moenia  tendit 
Aeneas,  magnaque  incusat  voce  Latinum,  580 

Testaturque  deos,  iterum  se  ad  proelia  cogi, 
Bis  jam  Italos  bostes,  haec  jam  altera  foedera  rumpi. 
Exoritur  trepidos  inter  discordia  cives : 
Urbem  alii  reserare  jubent  et  pandere  portas 
Dardanidis,  ipsumque  trahunt  in  moenia  regem ;  585 

Arma  ferunt  alii  et  pergunt  defendere  muros : 
Inclusas  ut  quum  latebroso  in  pumice  pastor 
Vestigavit  apes,  fumoque  implevit  amaro  ; 
Illae  intus  trepidae  rerum  per  ccrea  castra 
Discurrunt,  magnisque  acuunt  stridoribus  iras  ;  590 

Volvitur  ater  odor  tectis  ;  tum  murmure  caeco 
Intus  saxa  sonant,  vacuas  it  fiimus  ad  auras. 
Accidit  hacc  fessis  etiam  fortuna  Latinis, 
Quae  totam  hictu  concussit  funditus  urbcm. 
Rcgina  ut  tectis  venientem  prospicit  hostem,  595 

Incessi  muros,  ignes  ad  tecta  volare, 
Nusquam  acies  contra  Rutulas,  nuUa  agmina  Turni  ; 
Infelix  pugnae  juvencm  in  ccrtamine  credit 
Exstinctum,  ct,  subito  mcntem  turbata  dolore, 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    XII.  293 

Se  causam  clamat  crlmonque  caputquo  malorum,         600 
Multaque  per  maestum  demens  effata  furorem, 
Purpurcos  moritura  manu  discindit  amictus, 
Et  nodum  informis  leti  trabe  nectit  ab  alta. 
Quam  cladem  miserae  postquam  accep§re  Latinae ; 
Filia  prima  manu  flavos  Lavinia  crines  605 

Et  roseas  laniata  genas,  tum  cetera  circum 
Turba,  furit ;  resonant  late  plangoribus  aedes. 
Hinc  totara  infelix  vulgatur  fama  per  urbem  : 
Demittunt  mentes  ;  it  scissa  veste  Latinus, 
Conjugis  attonitus  fatis  urbisq^ue  ruiiia,  610 

Canitiem  immundo  perfusam  pulvere  turpans, 
Multaque  se  incusat,  qui  non  acceperit  ante 
Dardanium  Aenean,  generumque  adsciverit  ultro. 

Interea  extremo  bellator  in  aequore  Turnus 
Palantes  sequitur  paucos,  jam  segnior,  atque  615 

Jam  minus  atque  minus  successu  laetus  equorum. 
Attulit  hunc  illi  caccis  terroribus  aura 
Commixtum  clamorem,  arrectasque  impulit  aures 
Confusae  sonus  urbis  et  illaetabile  murmur. 
"  Hei  mihi,  quid  tanto  turbantur  moenia  luctu,  620 

"  Quisve  ruit  tantus  diversa  clamor  ab  urbe  ?  " 
Sic  ait,  adductisque  amens  subsis|:it  habenis. 
Atque  huic,  in  faciem  soror  ut  conversa  Metisci 
Aurigae  currumquc  et  equos  et  lora  regebat, 
Talibus  occurrit  dictis  :  "  Hac,  Turne,  sequamur         625 
"  Trojugenas,  qua  prima  viam  victoria  pandit  : 
*•  Sunt  alii,  qui  tecta  manu  defendere  possint. 
"  Ingruit  Aencas  Italis  ct  proelia  miscet, 
'■'  Et  nos  saeva  manu  mittamus  funora  Teucris. 
"  Nec  numero  inferior,  pugnae  ncquo  honore  rcccdcs."  630 
Turnus  ad  haec  : 

"  0  soror,  et  dudum  agnovi,  quum  prima  per  artem 
''  Foedera  turbasti  tequc  hacc  in  bella  dedisti, 


294  AENEIDOS   LIB.    XII. 

"  Et  nunc  nequidqiiam  fallis  dea.     Sed  quis  Olympo 

'*  Demissam  tantos  voluit  te  ferre  labores  ?  635 

"  An  fratris  miseri  letum  ut  crudele  videres  ? 

"  Nara  quid  ago,  aut  quae  jam  spondet  fortuna  salutera  ? 

"  Vidi  oculos  ante  ipse  meos  me  voce  vocantem 

"  Murranum,  quo  non  superafc  milii  carior  alter, 

"  Oppetere,  ingentem,  atque  "ingenti  vulnere  viq^um.  640 

'*  Occidit  infelix  ne  nostrum  dedecus  Ufens 

'•'  Adspiceret ;  Teucri  potiuntur  corpore  et  armis. 

"Exscindine  domos-id  rebus  defuifc  unum- 

"  Perpetiar,  dextra  nec  Drancis  dicta  refellam  ? 

"  Terga  dabo,  et  Turnum  fugientem  Laec  terra  videbit  ?  645 

"  Usque  adeone  mori  miserum  est  ?    Vos  o  mihi  Manes 

"  Este  boni,  quoniam  superis  aversa  voluntas. 

"  Sancta  ad  vos  anima  atque  istius  nescia  culpae 

"  Descendam,  magnorumhaud  unquam  indignus  avoruin." 

Vix  ea  fatus  erat ;  medios  volat,  ecce,  per  hostes  650 

Vectus  equo  spumante  Satfes,  adversa  sagitta 

Saucius  ora,  ruitque  implorans  nomiue  Turnum : 

"  Turne,  in  te  suprema  salus  :  miserere  tuorum  ! 

*'  Eulminat  Aeneas  armis,  summasque  minatur 

"  Dejecturum  arces  Italum  excidioque  daturum,  655 

"  Jamque  faces  ad  tecta  volant.     In  te  ora  Latini, 

"  In  te  oculos  referunt ;  mussat  rex  ipse  Latinus, 

"  Quos  generos  vocet,  aut  quae  sese  ad  foedera  fiectat. 

"  Praeterea  regina,  tui  fidissima,  dextra 

"  Occidit  ipsa  sua,  lucemque  exterrita  fugit.  660 

"  Soli  pro  portis  Mcssapus  et  acer  Atinas 

"  Sustentant  aciem  ;  circum  hos  utrimque  phalanges 

"  Stant  densae,  strictisque  seges  mucronibus  horret 

"  Ferrea :  tu  currum  dcserto  in  gramine  versas  ?  " 

Obstupuifc  varia  confusus  imagine  rerum  665 

Turnus,  et  obtutu  tacito  stetit.     Aestuat  ingens 

Udo  in  corde  pudor  mixtoque  insania  hictu 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    XII.  295 

Et  furiis  agitatus  amor  et  conscia  virtus. 

Ut  primum  discussae  umbrae  et  lux  reddita  menti ; 

Ardentes  oculorum  orbes  ad  moenia  torsit  670 

Turbidus,  eque  rotis  magnam  respexit  ad  urbem. 

Ecce  autem  flammis  inter  tabulata  volutus 

Ad  coelum  undabat  vertex,  turrimque  tenebat, 

Turrim,  compactis  trabibus  quam  eduxerat  ipse, 

Subdideratque  rotas,  pontesque  instraverat  altos.  675 

"  Jam  jam  fata,  soror,  superant :  absiste  morari : 

"  Quo  deus  et  quo  dura  vocat  fortuna,  sequamur. 

"  Stat  conferre  manum  Aeneae,  stat,  quidquid  acerbi  est, 

"  Morte  pati,  neque  me  indecorem,  germana,  videbis 

"  Amplius.     Hunc,  oro,  sine  me  furere  ante  furorem."  680 

Dixit,  et  e  curru  saltum  dedit  ocius  arvis, 

Perque  hostes,  per  tela  ruit,  maestamque  sororem 

Deserit  ac  rapido  cursu  media  agmina  rumpit. 

Ac  veluti  montis  saxum  de  vertice  praeceps 

Quum  ruit,  avulsum  vento,  seu  turbidus  imber  685 

Proluit,  aut  annis  solvit  sublapsa  vetustas  ; 

Fertur  in  abruptum  magno  mons  improbus  actu, 

Exsultatque  solo,  silvas,  armenta  virosque 

Involvens  secum :  disjecta  per  agmina  Turnus 

Sic  urbis  ruit  ad  muros,  ubi  plurima  fuso  >  690 

Sanguine  terra  madet  striduntque  bastilibus  aurae, 

Significatque  manu  et  magno  simul  incipit  ore  : 

"  Parcite  jam,  Kutuli,  et  vos  tela  inhibete,  Latini : 

"  Quaecumque  est  fortuna,  mea  est ;  me  verius  unum 

"  Pro  vobis  foedus  luere  et  decernere  ferro."  695 

Discessere  omnes  medii,  spatiumque  dedere. 

At  pater  Aeneas  audito  nomine  Turni 
Deserit  et  muros  et  summaa.  deserit  arces, 
Praecipitatque  moras  omnes,  opera  omnia  rurapit, 
Laetitia  exsultans,  horrendumque  intonat  armis :         700 
Quantus  Athos  aut  quantus  Eryx  aut  ipse,  coruscis 


29G  AENEIDOS    LIB.    XII. 

Quum  fremit  ilicibus,  quantus,  gaudetque  nivali 

Vertice  se  attollens  pater  Appenninus  ad  auras. 

Jam  vcro  et  Kutuli  cortatim  et  Troes  et  omnes 

Convertcre  oculos  Itali,  quique  alta  tenebant  705 

Moenia  quique  imos  pulsabant  ariete  muros, 

Armaque  deposuere  liumeris.     Stupet  ipse  Latinus, 

Ingentes,  genitos  diversis  j^artibus  orbis, 

Intcr  se  coiisse  viros  et  cernere  ferro. 

Atque  illi,  ut  vacuo  patueruut  aequore  campi,  710 

Procursu  rapido,  conjectis  eminus  bastis, 

Invadunt  Martem  clipeis  atque  aere  sonoro  - 

Dat  gemitum  tellus  - ;  tum  crebros  ensibus  ictus 

Congeminant :  fors  et  virtus  miscentur  in  unum. 

Ac  velut  ingenti  Sila  summove  Taburno  715 

Quum  duo  conversis  inimica  in  proelia  tauri 

Frontibus  incurrunt,  pavidi  cessere  magistri, 

Stat  pecus  omne  metu  mutum  mussantque  juvencae, 

Quis  nemori  imperitet,  quem  tota  armenta  sequantur ; 

Illi  inter  sese  multa  vi  vulnera  miscent,  720 

Cornuaque  obnixi  infigunt,  et  sanguine  largo 

Colla  armosque  lavant ;  gemitu  nemus  omne  remugit : 

Non  aliter  Tros  Aeneas  et  Daunius  bcros 

Concurrunt  clipeis  ;  ingens  fragor  aetbera  complet. 

Jupiter  ipse  duas  aequato  examine  lances  725 

Sustinet,  et  fata  imponit  diversa  duorum, 

Quem  damnet  labor,  et  quo  vergat  pondere  letum. 

Emicat  hic,  impune  putans,  et  corpore  toto 

Alte  sublatum  consurgit  Turnus  in  cnsem, 

Et  ferit :  exclamant  Troes  trepidique  Latini,  730 

Arrectaeque  amborum  acies.     At  perfidus  ensis 

Frangitur,  in  medioque  ardei\tem  deserit  ictu : 

Ni  fuga  subsidio  subeat.     Fugit  ocior  Euro, 

Ut  capulum  ignotum  dcxtramque  adspexit  inermem. 

Fama  est,  praecipitem,  quum  prima  in  proelia  junctos  735 


AENEIDOS   LIB.    XII.  297 

Conscendebat  equos,  patrio  mucrone  relicto, 
Dum  trepidat/ferrum  aurigae  rapuisse  Metisci; 
Idque  dlu,  dum  terga  dabant  palantia  Teucri, 
Sufifecit ;  postquam  arma  dei  ad  Vulcania  ventum  cst, 
Mortalis  mucro,  glacies  ceu  futilis,  ictu  740 

Dissiluit,  fulva  resplendet  fragmen  arena. 
Ergo  amens  diversa  fuga  petit  aequora  Turnus, 
Et  nunc  liuc,  inde  huc  incertos  implicat  orbes : 
Undique  enim  densa  Teucri  inclusere  corona, 
Atque  hinc  vasta  palus,  binc  ardua  moenia  cingunt.    745 
Nec  minus  Aeneas,  quamquam  tardante  sagitta 
Interdum  genua  impediunt  cursumque  recusant, 
Insequitur,  trepidique  pedem  pede  fervidus  urguet : 
Inclusum  veluti  si  quando  flumine  nactus 
Cervum,  aut  puniceae  septum  formidine  pennae,  750 

Venator  cursu  canis  et  latratibus  instat ; 
lUe  autem,  insidiis  et  ripa  territus  alta, 
Mille  fugit  refugitque  vias,  at  vividus  Umber 
Haeret  hians,  jam  jamque  tenet,  similisque  tenenti 
Increpuit  malis,  morsuque  elusus  inani  est.  755 

Tum  vero  exoritur  clamor,  ripaequo  lacusque 
Responsant  circa,  et  coelum  tonat  omne  tumultu. 
Ille  simul  fugiens  Rutulos  simul  increj^at  omnes, 
Nomine  quemque  vocans,  notumquc  efflagitat  ensem ; 
Aeneas  mortem  contra  j)raesensque  minatur  760 

Exitium,  si  quisquam  adeat,  terretque  trementes, 
Excisurum  urbem  minitans,  et  saucius  instat. 
Quinque  orbes  esplent  cursu,  totidemque  retexunt 
Huc  iUuc :  neque  enim  levia  aut  ludicra  petuntur 
Pracmia,  sed  Turni  de  vita  et  sanguine  certant.  765 

Forte  sacer  Eauno  foUis  olea^ter  amaris 
Hic  steterat,  nautis  oUm  venerabile  Ugnum, 
Servati  ex  undis  ubi  figere  dona  solebant 
Laurenti  divo  et  votas  suspendere  vestes ; 
13* 


298  AENEIDOS   LIB.    XII. 

Sed  stirpem  Teucri  nuUo  discrimine  sacrum  770 

Sustulerant,  puro  ut  possent  concurrere  campo. 
Hic  hasta  Aeneae  stabat,  huc  impetus  illam 
Detulerat  fixam  et  lenta  in  radice  tenebat. 
Incubuit  voluitque  manu  convellere  ferrum 
Dardanides,  teloque  sequi,  quem  prendere  cursu  775 

Non  poterat.     Tum  vero  amens  formidine  Tumus 
"  Faune,  precor,  miserere,"  inquit  "  tuque  optima  ferrum 
"  Terra  tene,  colui  vestros  si  semper  honores,    . 
'  Quos  contra  Aeneadae  bello  fecere  profanos." 
Dixit,  opemque  dei  non  cassa  in  vota  vocavit :  780 

Namque  diu  luctans  lentoque  in  stirpe  moratus 
Viribus  haud  uUis  valuit  discludere  morsus 
Roboris  Aeneas.     Dum  nititur  acer  et  instat, 
Rursus  in  aurigae  faciem  mutata  Metisci 
Procurrit  fratrique  ensem  dea  Daunia  reddit.  785 

Quod  Venus  audaci  nymphae  indignata  licere, 
Accessit,  telumque  alta  ab  radice  revellit. 
01] i  sublimes,  armis  animisque  refecti, 
Hic  gladio  fidens,  hic  acer  et  arduus  hasta, 
Adsistunt  contra  certamine  Martis  anheli.  790 

Junonem  interea  rex  omnipotentis  Olympi 
Alloquitur,  fulva  pugnas  de  nube  tuentem : 
"  Quae  jam  finis  erit,  conjux  ?  quid  denique  restat  ? 
"  Indigetem  Aenean  scis  ipsa,  et  scire  fateris, 
"  Deberi  coelo,  fatisque  ad  sidera  toUi.  .    795 

"  Quid  struis,  aut  qua  spe  gelidis  in  nubibus  haercs  ? 
"  Mortalin'  decuit  violari  vulncre  divum, 
"  Aut  enscm-quid  cnim  sine  te  Juturna  valerct  ?- 
"  Ereptum  reddi  Turno,  et  vim  crescere  victis? 
*'  Desine  jam  tandem,  prccibusque  inflectere  nostris  ;  800 
"  Nec  te  tantus  cdat  tacitam  dolor,  ct  mihi  curae 
"  Saepe  tuo  dulci  tristes  ex  orc  recursent. 
"  Ventum  ad  supremum  er^t.     Tcrris  agitare  vel  undis 


AENEID03    LIB.    XII.  299 

"  Trojanos  potuisti,  infandum  accendere  bellum, 
"  Deformare  domum,  et  luctu  miscere  hymenaeos  ;      805 
"  Ulterius  tentare  veto,"     Sic  Jupiter  orsus  ; 
Sic  dea  submisso  contra  Saturnia  vultu : 
"  Ista  quidem  quia  nota  mihi  tua,  magne,  voluntas, 
"  Jupiter,  et   Turnum  et  terras  invita  reliqui ; 
"  Nec  tu  me  aeria  solam  nunc  sede  videres  810 

"  Digna  indigna  pati,  sed  flammis  cincta  sub  ipsam 
"  Starem  aciem  traheremque  inimica  in  proelia  Teucros. 
"  Juturnam  misero,  fateor,  succurrere  fratri 
"  Suasi,  et  pro  vita  majora  audere  probavi ; 
"  Non  ut  tela  tamen,  non  ut  contenderet  arcum  :         815 
"  Adjuro  Stygii  caput  implacabile  fontis, 
"  Una  superstitio  superis  quae  reddita  divis. 
"  Et  nunc  cedo  equidem,  pugnasque  exosa  relinquo ; 
"  Illu4  te,  nulla  fati  quod  lege  tenetur, 
"  Pro  Latio  obtestor,  pro  majestate  tuorum :  820 

"  Quum  jam  connubiis  pacem  felicibus  -esto- 
"  Component,  cum  jam  leges  et  foedera  jungent ; 
"  Ne  vetus  indigenas  nomen  mutare  Latinos, 
"  Neu  Troas  fieri  jubeas  Teucrosque  vocari, 
"  Aut  vocem  mutare  viros,  aut  vertere  vestem,  825 

"  Sit  Latium,  sint  Albani  per  saecula  reges, 
"  Sit  Eomana  potens  Itala  virtute  propago  ; 
"  Occidit,  occideritque  sinas  cum  nomine  Troja," 
Olli  subridens  hominum  rerumque  repertor : 
"  Es  germana  Jovis  Saturnique  altera  proles :  830 

"'  Irarum  tantos  volvis  sub  pectore  fluctus  ? 
"  Verum  age  et  inceptum  frastra  submitte  furorem  : 
"  Do,  quod  vis,  et  me  victusque  volensque  remitto. 
•  "  Sei-monem  Ausonii  patrium  moresque  tenebunt, 
"  Utque  est,  nomen  erit ;  commixti  corpore  tantum     835 
"  Subsident  Teucri.     Morem  ritusque  sacrorum 
"  Adjiciam,  faciamque  omncs  uno  ore  Latinos. 


300  AENEIDOS    LIB.    XII. 

'  Hinc  genus  Ausonio  mixtum  quod  sanguine  surget, 
"  Supra  homines,  supra  ire  deos  pietate  videbis, 
"Nec  gens  ulla  tuos  aeque  celebrabit  lionorcs."    *         840 
Adnuit  liis  Juno,  et  mentem  laetata  retorsit ; 
Interea  excedit  coelo,  nubemquc  relinquit. 
His  actis  aliud  genitor  secum  ipse  volutat, 
Juturnamque  parat  fratris  dimittere  ab  armis. 
Dicuutur  geminae  pestes  cognomine  Dirae,  845 

Quas  et  Tartaream  Nox  intempesta  Megaeram 
Uno  eodemque  tulit  partu,  paribusque  revinxit 
Serpentum  spiris,  ventosasque  addidit  alas. 
Hae  Jovis  ad  solium  saevique  in  limine  regis 
Apparent,  acuuntque  metum  mortalibus  aegris,  850 

Si  quando  letum  borrificum  morbosque  deum  rex 
Molitur,  meritas  aut  bello  territat  urbes. 
Harum  unam  celerem  demisit  ab  aetbere  summo     , 
Jupiter,  inque  omen  Juturnae  occurrere  jussit. 
Illa  volat,  celerique  ad  terram  turbine  fertur:  855 

Non  secus  ac  nervo  per  nubem  impulsa  sagitta, 
Armatam  saevi  Partbus  quam  felle  veneni, 
Parthus  sive  Cydon,  telum  immedicabile,  torsit, 
Stridens  et  celeres  incognita  transilit  umbras. 
Talis  se  sata  Nocte  tulit,  terrasque  petivit.  860 

Postquam  acies  videt  Iliacas  atque  agmina  Turni ; 
Alitis  in  parvae  sul^itam  coUecta  figuram, 
Quae  quondam  in  bustis  aut  culminibus  desertis 
Nocte  sedens  serum  canit  importuna  per  umbras, 
Hanc  versa  in  facicm  Turni  se  pcstis  ob  ora  865 

Fertque  refertque  sonans,  clipeumque  everberat  alis. 
lUi  membra  novus  solvit  formidine  torpor, 
Arrectaeque  horrore  coraae,  ct  vox  fliucibus  haesit. 
At,  procul  ut  Dirac  stridorem  agnovit  ct  alas, 
Infelix  crines  scindit  Juturna  solutos,  870 

UnguibuR  ora  soror  fooda'm  et  pectora  pugnis. 


AENEIDOS    LIB.    XII.  301 

"  Quid  mmc  tc  tua,  Turne,  potest  germana  juvare, 
"  Aut  quid  jam  durae  superat  mihi.?     Qua  tibi  lucem 
"  Arte  morer  ?     Talin'  possum  me  opponere  monstro  ? 
'•  Jam  jam  linquo  acies.     Ne  me  terrete  timentem,      875 
"  Obscenae  volucres  :  alarum  verbera  nosco 
"  Letalemque  sonum,  nec  fallunt  jussa  superba 
"  Magnanimi  Jovis.     Haec  pro  virginitate  reponit  ? 
"  Quo  vitam  dedit  aetcrnam  ?  cur  mortis  ademta  est 
"  Condicio  ?     Possem  tantos  finire  dolores  880 

"  Nunc  certe,  et  misero  fratri  comes  ire  per  umbras. 
"  Immortalis  ego  ?  aut  quidquam  mibi  dulce  meorum 
"  Te  sine,  frater,  erit  ?     0  quae  satis  alta  debiscat 
"  Terra  mibi,  manesque  deam  demittat  ad  imos  ?  " 
Tantum  effata,  caput  glauco  contexit  amictu  885 

Multa  gemens,  et  se  fiuvio  dea  condidit  alto. 
Aeneas  instat  contra,  telumque  coruscat 
Ingens  arboreum,  et  saevo  sic  pectore  fatur : 
"  Quae  nunc  deinde  mora  est,  aut  quid  jam,  Turne,  retrac- 
"  Non  cursu,  saevis  certandum  est  comminus  armis.    [tas  ? 
''  Verte  omnes  tete  in  facies,  et  contrabe,  quidquid      891 
"  Sive  animis  sive  arte  vales  ;  opta  ardua  pennis 
"  Astra  sequi  clausumque  cava  te  condere  terra  !  " . 
Ille  caput  quassans :  "  Non  me  tua  fervida  terrent 
''  Dicta,  ferox  ;  di  me  terrent  et  Jupiter  bostis."  895 

Nec  j)lura  effatus,  saxum  circumspicit  ingens, 
Saxum  antiquum,  ingens,  campo  quod  forte  jacebat, 
Limes  agro  positus,  litem  ut  discerneret  arvis. 
Vix  illud  lecti  bis  sex  cervice  subirent, 
Qualia  nunc  bominum  producit  corpora  tellus ,  900 

Ille  manu  raptum  trepida  torquebat  in  bostem, 
Altior  insurgens  et  cursu  concitus  beros. 
Sed  neque  currentem  se  nec  cognoscit  euntem, 
ToUentemvp  manu  saxumque  immane  moventem  : 
Genua  labantj  gelidus  concrevit  frigore  sanguis,  905 


302  AENEIDOS    LIB.    XII. 

Tum  lapis  ipse  viri,  vacuum  per  inane  volutus, 

Nec  spatium  evasit  totum,  neque  pertulit  ictum. 

Ac  velut  in  somnis.  oculos  ubi  languida  pressit 

Nocte  quies,  nequidquam  avidos  extendere  cursus 

Velle  videmur,  et  in  mediis  conatibus  aegri  910 

Succidimus  ;  non  lingua  valet,  non  corpore  notae 

Sufficiunt  vires,  nec  vox  aut  verba  sequuntur : 

Sic  Turno,  quacumque  viam  virtute  petivit, 

Successum  dea  dira  negat.     Tum  pectore  sensus 

Vertuntur  yarii.     Kutulos  adspectat  et  urbem,  915 

Cunctaturque  metu,  telumque  instare  tremiscit ; 

Nec,  quo  se  eripiat,  nec,  qua  vi  tendat  in  liostem, 

Nec  currus  usquam  videt  aurigamque  sororem. 

Cunctanti  telum  Aeneas  fatale  coruscat, 

Sortitus  fortunam  oculis,  et  corpore  toto  920 

Eminus  intorquet.     Murali  concita  numquam 

Tormento  sic  saxa  fremunt,  nec  fulmine  tanti 

Dissultant  crepitus :  volat  atri  turbinis  instar 

Exitium  dirum  hasta  ferens,  orasque  recludit 

Loricae  et  clipei  extremos  septemplicis  orbes.  925 

Per  medium  stridens  transit  femur.     Incidit  ictus 

Ingens  ad  terram  duplicato  poplite  Turnus. 

Consurgunt  gemitu  Kutuli,  totusque  remugit 

Mons  circum,  et  vocem  late  nemora  alta  remittunt. 

Ille  humilis  supplexque  oculos  dextramque  precantem  930 

Protendens  "  Equidem  merui.  nec  deprccor  "  inquit : 

"  Utere  sorte  tua.     Miseri  te  si  qua  parentis 

"  Tangere  cura  potest ;  oro-fuit  ct  tibi  talis 

"  Anchises  genitor-,  Dauni  miscrere  senectae, 

"  Et  me,  seu  corpus  spoliatum  lumine  mavis,  935 

"Kedde  meis.     Vicisti,  et  victum  tendere  palmas 

*'  Ausonii  videre  ;  tua  est  Lavinia  conjux : 

"  Ulterius  nc  tende  odiis."     Sietit  acer  in  armis 

Aencas,  volvcns  oculos,  dextramquc  repressit ; 


AENEIDOS   LIB,    XII,  303 

Et  jam  jamque  magis  cunctantem  flectere  sermo  940 

Coeperat,  infelix  humero  quura  apparuit  alto 

Balteus,  et  notis  fulserunt  cingula  bullis 

Pallantis  pueri,  victum  quem  vulnere  Turnus 

Straverat  atque  humeris  inimicum  insigne  gerebat. 

lUe,  oculis  postquam  saevi  monumenta  doloris  945 

Exuviasque  hausit,  furiis  accensus  et  ira 

Terribilis :  '•'  Tune  hinc  spoliis  indute  meorum 

"  Eripiare  mihi  ?     Pallas  te  hoc  vulnere,  Pallas 

"  ImmoLat,  et  poenam  scelerato  ex  sanguine  sumit." 

Hoc  dicens  ferrum  adverso  sub  pectore  condit  950 

Fervidus  ;  ast  iUi  solvuntur  frigore  membra, 

Vitaque  cum  gemitu  fugit  indignata  sub  umbras. 


IJ^  O  T  E  S 


The  Fates. 


NOTES  OK  THE  AENEID, 


Thb  poem  ia  entitled  the  Aeneid  because  it  describes  the  fortunes  of  Aeneaa.  In 
writing  it,  Virgil,  who  possessed  an  eminently  religious  mind  and  an  earnest  patiiot- 
ism,  aimed  not  only  to  secure  to  himself  a  higher  poetic  fame,  but  also  to  exalt  tha 
glory  of  Rome,  and  to  bring  his  countrymeu  baok  to  that  traditional  reverence  for 
their  r^igion  'which  had  ic  former  ages  given  the  nation  ita  wonderful  strength  of 
character. 

THE  INSCRIPTION. 

IIlc — Martis»  The  authenticity  of  these  four  Unes  is  doubtful.  If  they 
were  written  by  Virgil,  which  is  by  no  means  improbable,  they  were  not 
designed  as  the  beginning  of  the  epic,  but  only  as  a  liind  of  inscription  or 
epigr«ph.  There  is  also  some  uncertainty  about  the  construction  of  the 
Bentcnce.  Peerlliamp  supposes  an  ellipsis  at  the  end,  something  like  this  : 
qiiam  vereor  nt  vires  tanto  opcri  suji.ciant.  Others  supply  sum  with  c(/o,  and 
connect  horrentia  Martis  Vfii\\  arma,  thus  :  Hle  cgo  sum,  qui  modulatus  sum 


*  Abbkeviations  used  in  the  Kotes. — Gr.  rcfers  to  Andrews  and  Stoddard'a 
Latin  Grammar,  rcvisod  edition.  Z.,  Zumpfs  Latin  Grammar.  E.,  EclogueB.  O. 
Qeorgics.    Numbers  alone  refer  to'tho  Aeneid.    Comp.,  Compare. 


308  NOTES    ON    TFIE    AENEID. 

— et  coegi — at  nunc  horrcntia  Martis  arma  virumque  caiio.  The  lattcr  is  the 
construction  gcuerally  adopted.  I  have  prcferred,  however,  to  place  the 
words  by  themsclvcs,  and  to  translate  them  as  a  complete  seutence,  thus : 
I,  that  poet  who  formerly  tuned  my  song  with  the  slender  pipc,  and,  coming 
forth  from  tlie  woods,  taught  the  neighboring  fields  to  obey  the  husbaud- 
man,  however  eagcr  for  harvests — a  worli  acceptable  to'  tillers  of  the  soil — 
yet  now  dcscribe  the  horrors  of  war.  Opus ;  the  work  is  that  expressed  in 
modulatus  stiin  and  coe(/i.  Dico  or  cano  must  be  undcrstood  with  horrentia 
Martis.  . 


BOOK  FIRST. 


Tlie  storm  at  sea,  the  landing  of  Aeneas  near  Cartliage, 
and  bis  rcce;[:»tion  at  tlie  palace  of  Dido. 

1-7.  la  tlie  opcning  passngc  tlie  siibject  and  plan  of  tbe  work  are  indicated.  Acne- 
as,  liis  wanderiugs  by  eea  and  land,  and  bis  wars  in  Italy.  In  muUum  et  lerrisjactatus 
et  alto  we  have  the  subject  of  tbe  first  six  books  of  tbe  work,  wlaich  thus  far  resem- 
bles  the  Odyssey  ;  in  multa  quoque  et  bello  passus  we  have  tliat  which  is  embraced  in 
the  last  six  books,  in  which  the  poet  describcs  b:ittles  and  single  combatB  like  those 
of  the  Ihad. 

1-2.  I  sing  of  arms  and  the  man  who  Jirst,  by  fate  an  ezile,  came  from 
the  coast  of  Troy  to  Italy  and  the  Lavinian  shores.  QKi.  In  prosc  the  rela- 
tive  stands  uniformly  at  the  beginning  of  its  clause,  except  occasionally 
whcn  placcd  after  prcpositions.     Wc  shall  find  it  very  often  in  poetry,  as 

here,  out  of  its  proper  place. Primas.     The  sense  of  the  word  here  is : 

primo,  in  the  first  place,  in  the  beyinniny ;  i.  e.  in  the  very  bcginning  of 
Roman  tradition.  This  accords  with  Ueyne's  interprctatiou,  and  it  is  more 
natural  than  any  other  which  has  been  proposed.  Primus  as  an  adjective  is 
very  frequently  substituted  for  the  adverb  primum  ov  primo;  see  Gr.  §  205, 
R.  15,  (b);  Z.  §  68G.  It  is  used  precisely  thus  in  viii.  319.  There,  as  the 
first  event  in  the  history  of  Latin  civilization,  Saturn  is  said  to  have  come 
from  Olympus :  prhmis  {priyno,  in  prtncipio)  venit  ab  Olympo :  here,  in  the 
passage  before  us,  as  the  earliest  tradition  in  Roman  history,  Aeneas  is  said 
to  have  landcd  in  Latium.  It  is  thus  that  the  old  Roman  chronlcle  bcgins 
(sce  Livy  I.  1)  with  the  story  of  Aencas,  as  the  first  fiict  to  be  rccordeu: 
Jam  priiunm  ouiuium  satis  constat — Aoieae,  sq. .  Aeneas  thcrefore  stauds  iu 
VirgiFs  mind,  not  Icss  thau  in  that  of  the  historiau,  as  the  first  or  earlicst 
of  tlie  Roman  line ;  the  true  fouuder  of  the  nation.  If  the  poct  raeuns,  as 
Bonie  understaud  hiu!,  that  Acncas  was  the  first  Trojan  u-ho  camc  to  Italy 
and  Latium,  he  uccessarily  inii)lics  that  some  othcr  Trojans  arrivcd  tkcre  af- 
TER  him,  as  well  as  that  none  rcachcd  Italy  beforc  hirn.  We  inay  say,  indced, 
with  Forbiger  and  othcrs,  that  uo  Trojan  did  rcach  ItaJy  bcforc  Aeneas,  be- 


BOOK    FIRST.  313 

34-49.  Six  yeara  after  the  fall  of  Troy  (see  introductory  note  to  Book  Tbird)  Aeneas 
and  his  followers  arrived  at  Drepanum,  in  thc  wcst  of  Sicily,  where  they  ■svere  hospita- 
bly  entcrtained  by  Acestes,  a  prince  of  Trojan  descent.  During  this  visit  Anchiees, 
the  fatber  of  Aeneas,  died.  Tbe  Trojans  wcre  now,  in  the  seventh  summer,  setting 
sail  again  frora  Drepanum,  joyful  (laeii)  in  the  hope  of  soon  reaching  Italy,  the  end 
of  their  wanderings.  The  narrative  thcrofore  begins  in  the  middle  of  tbc  adventurcB 
which  form  the  subject  of  the  poem.  What  had  prcviously  transpired  la  rclatcd  by 
Aentaa  himself  in  the  second  and  third  books. 

34.  Itt  altnm  TCla  dabant;  were  uiifurling  their  sailsfor  the  deep;  ventis 

is  understood  after  dabant :  were  giving  their  sails  to  the  windx. 35. 

Salis ;  Sal  is  frequent  for  inare. Aerc  ;  wiih  the  hrazen  ship.     Sometimes 

the  whole  ship  was  coppered,  but  more  frequently  the  prow  alone,  or  the 
stern  and  prow.  Aere  is  here  used,  as  we  often  find  trabs  ov  pimis,  for  the 
ship  itself.  Some  refer  aere  to  the  three  projecting  points  of  metal  which 
formed  the  rostrum,  or  beak  of  the  ship ;  but  these  were  of  iron.  See 
Smith's  Dic.  Antiq.,  article  rostruin.     On  the  form  of  the  ship,  see  woodcut, 

page  406 ;  on  the  rostrum,  page  598. Rnebant  is  here  transitive  ;  ploughed 

or  cut,  as  G.  ii.  308;  mit  nubem.    Comp.  x.,  214. 36.  Aeternum  servans 

THlnns  ;  cherishing  the  eternal  wound;  tlie  bitter  grief  mentioned  in  25.' 
37.  Mcne — deslstere.     Am  I  to  desist  from  my  purpose,  defeated  ?    A  rehe- 
ment  question  is  often  expressed  by  an  infinitive  standing  unconnected. 
Gr.  §  270,  R.  2,  (a) ;  Zumpt,  §  609,  supposes  an  eUipsis  of  credibile  est,  or 

verumne  est  ? 39.  Qnlppe  ;    hecause  fOrsooth.     The  following  sentence, 

Pallasne  etc,  in  less  excited  style  would  have  been  affirmative  with  at  tameji, 

instead  of  bcing  expressed  in  the  more  forcible  inierrogative  form. Clas- 

sem  Argivum ;  a,  not  the,  feet  of  the  Greeks.     Virgil  often  uses  the  ternis 

Argos  and  Argivi,  for  Greece  and  Greeks  in  genoral ;  as  above,  24. 10. 

Ipsos ;  themsclves,  personally,  as  distinguished  from  the  ships.     Comp.  iii. 

619. PontO.     After  mcrgo  and  suhmei-go  the  ablative,  either  with  sub  ot 

in,  ov  witliout  a  prep^osition,  is,  nsed.     See  vi.  342  ;  also  below,  584.     Ranib- 

horn's  Gram.,  §  150,  B.  4. 41.  Unins ;  of  one  only.    Pallas  was  angry  wit  h 

Ajax  alone,  and  friendly  to  the  rest  of  the  Greeks,  whereas  Juno  was  angry 
with  the  whole  of  the  Trojan  race.     The  i  in  unius  is  scanned  short  here,  as 

frequently  in  genitives  of  this  termination.     Gr.  §  283,  exc.  4;  Z.  §  IG.- 

Ob  noxam;  the  outrage  offered  to  Cassandra  by  Ajax  the  less,  or  the  OUean 
Ajax,  in  the  temple  of  Minerva,  during  the  sack  of  Troy.  See  ii.  403—105. 
Pallas,  enraged  on  account  of  this  violation  of  her  sanctuary,  raiscd  a  sforni 
against  the  fleet  of  Ajax,  on  his  return  from  Troy,  when  passing  near  tli( 
Eubrean  promontory  of  Caphareus,  destroying  the  fleet,  and  killing  Aj;ix 
him.self  with  lightning.     His  body  was  then  cast  by  the  wavcs  upon   tlic 

rocks. Oilei  is  a  trisyllable ;  the  genitive  of  the  noun  Oileus,  not  of  tbe 

adjective  Olleiu.  The  gcnitive  Wvmis  filius  understood;  thc  son  of  0-i-ltus. 
See  Gr.  §  211,  R.  7  ;  Z.  §  761.     The  other  Ajax,  called  "the  greater,"  wa.'- 

the  son  of  Telamon. 42.  Ipsa  siguifies  that  Pallas  did  this  herself  pi-r- 

sonally,  without  the  interposition  of  any  other  divinity.     Only  Pallas  ui.d 
14 


314 


NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 


Juno  were  allowed  to  hurl  the  thunderbolt.    Comp,  iv.  122,  xii.  812. 13, 

Ilbn  brea/Jilnff  forth  flames  from  his  Ireast  pierced  (witli  the  thundcrbolt). 

15.  InfigO  tiikcs  indificrently  thc  dativc  or  abhitivc.    Conip.  v.  5'i4,  ix. 

740. 16.  EgOj  contrasted  with  Pallas. Diram;  ior  dtvorum.    See  ou 

superum,  4. Inccdo,  is  a 

majcstic  walk.  Comp.  405. 
It  is  substitutcd  hcre  for 
sum-  to  express  in  a  livelicr 
manner  the  conscious  su 

periority  of  Juno. Uc- 

gina;  Gr.  §  210,  (a). 

47.  Sorrfl».  Juno  and  Ju- 
piter  were  cliildren  of  Sat- 

urn. 48.  Practerea ;  for 

posfhac,  hcreaftcr. Aris; 

imponere  takes  tlie  dative 
more  frequently  than  the 
ablative.  Thc  indicative, 
adorat  and  imponet,  has 
better  manuscript  authori- 
ty  here  than  the  subjunc- 
tive,  given  in  some  edi- 
tions.  The  indicative  also 
expresses  tlie  idea  more 
forcibly ;  surehj  no  one 
henceforth  adores,  no  one 
will  hring  sacrifice.  Tiic 
present  is  oceasionally 
found  for  the  future.     See 

ii.  322. Jnnouis  is  more 

forcible  than  meum  would 
havc  becn.     See  on  354. 

50-<33.   De.-fcriiition    of  tlio 
realm  of  Aeohis  in  the  LiparjB- 

an  ielands. 

51.  Loca;   Gr.   §  204. 

R.  3. Anstris ;  wiih  fu- 

rious  winds ;  the  namcs  of 
particular  winds  arc  ofteu 
put  for  the  gencral  term. 
juno.  For   the  ablative,   see  Gr, 

§  250,  2,  (1) ;  Z.  5^  4G2 ;  conip.  ii,  238.     Thc  Anster  was  a  south  wind,  dry,  hot, 
and  violcnt. 52.  Acoiiam  ;  one  of  tlie  Lipari  islanfls.  nortli-east  ofSicily; 


BOOK    FIRST.  315 

perhaps  Lipara  itself.     See  the  account  of  Aeohis  in  the  Classical  Diction- 

ary.' Antro  ;  join  with  premit  ;  it  does  not  denote  the  situation  oi'  Aeohcs, 

but  of  the  winds  alone.      They  are  reprcsented  as  luctantes,  strugglinr) ; 

that  is,  with  each  other.    Comp.  ii.  417. 51.  Yinclts;  bi/ co?iJinemcnt ;  not, 

by  chains. 55.  Magno  cnm  mnrmurc  mantis ;  witli  tke  loud  re-echoivg  of 

the  mountain  ;  the  mountain  resounds  with  tlie  roaring  of  the  winds,  impa- 
tient  at  being  thua  confined,  and  furious  to  burst  tlie  barriers.     Comp.  be- 

low,  245. 56.  Arcc.     His  palace  was  built  on  the  summit  of  a  mountain, 

and  is  called  in  140  aula.  Here  Ulysses  was  entertained  by  Aeolus,  or  Hip- 
potades,  as  described  at  the  beginning  of  the  Tenth  Book  of  the  Odyssey. 

Virgil  conceives  of  tlie  king  seated  on  a  throne  in  ihe  opcn  air. 58.  Ni 

faeiat,  ferant  vcrrant.  For  the  present  subjunctive,  see  Gr.  §  261,  2 ;  Z. 
§  524;  also  Madvig,  §  347,  obs.  1;  comp.  ii.  599,  vi.  293,  xi.  912. 
The  present  in  these  examples  is  used  for  the  sake  of  greater  livehness,  to 
represent  as  possible  a  thing  which  is  believed  in  itself  impossible  or  im- 

probable. 59.  Qnlppc  \for,  because  ;  it  is  removed  from  its  proper  place, 

at  the  beginning  of  the  sentence,  by  poetic  license  ;  translate, /or  shoidd  he 
not  do  this,  they  would  swiflly  bear  aivay  xiiith  themselves  the  seas  and  lands 

and  deep  heaven,  and  sweep  them  through  the  air. 60.  Spclnncis.     For 

the  case,  comp.  ii.  553  ;  thougli  the  ablative  also  occurs  after  abdere. 

61.  Molem  et  montes  altos.     An  instance  of  hendiadys,  for  molem  montium 

altorum.     Gr.  §  323,  2,  (3);  Z.  §  741. lusnper;  above  pr  iipon  them  ; 

comp.  iii.  579 ;  though  sorae  prefer  to  render  it  moreover. 62.  Foedcre 

certo ;  according  to  a  determinate  law.     Gr.  §  249,  ii.      Join  with  the  in- 

finitives. 63.  Premere ;  to  restrain  (them) ;  eos,  understood,  is  the  ob- 

ject. Seiret;  subjunctive  under  Gr.  §  264,  5 ;  Z.  §  567  ;  who  might,  or 

thaf  he  might  know. Jnssns  ;  when  ordered ;  that  is,  by  Jupiter. 

64-SO.  The  addresa  of  Juno  to  Aeolus,  and  his  reply. 
64.  Vocibus;    Gr.  §  245.      To  whom  then  Juno  addressed  these  words. 

65.  Namque  is  elliptical  here,  hke  enim  above,  19.     It  introduces  the 

ground  of  her  appeal  to  Aeolus :  I  come  to  thee, — for — .      Comp.  i.  731, 

vii.   195. 66.  Mnlccre  and  tollcre  are  governed  by  dedit  as  accusatives, 

instead  of  being  in  the  form  of  the  participle  iu  dus.  Gr.  §  274,  R.  7,  b  ;  Z. 
§  653.     The  father  has  given  to  you  to  calm  [the  calmi^ig) — to  raise  {the 

raising  oi )  the  waves. 67.  Tyrrhcnum  acquor;  the  Tuscan  water ;  that 

part  of  the  Mediterranean  whicli  lies  between  Italy  and  the  islands  of  Sicily, 
Sardinia,  and  Corsica :  Acneas  was  now  entering  upon  it.     For  tlie  accusa- 

live  after  navigat,  see  Gr.  §  232,  (2) ;  Z.  §  383 ;  Madvig,  §  223,  obs.  4. 

68.  Victos.     The  household  gods  of  Troy,  as  its  protectors,  must  be  consid- 

ered  vanquished  in  suffering  it  to  be  captured  and  destroycd. 69.  Vcutis; 

striJce  fury  into  the  winds.  Gr.  §  223. Submcrsas  obrue  puppcs ;  hterally, 

the  ships  being  sunk  bury  (thou)  in  the  waves ;  a  Latin  idiom  which  should 
be  turned  into  English  by  two  independent  verbs :  sink  and  btiry  the  shipn 
in  the  waves  ;  Gr.  §  274,  3,  (b). TO.  Divcrsos;    ( their   erews)  asunder; 


316  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

refening  to  tbc  several  sliips'  conipanies. 71.  Bls  septem;    a  favoritc 

mode  of  exprcssing  numbcrs  in  poetrj'.     See  Gr.  §  118,  5,  (b). Corpore; 

a  limiting  ablativc  of  dcscription.     Gr.  §  211,  R.  6  ;  Z.  §  471.     Tlie  aUative 

of  quality  or  dcscription  is  niore  frequent  than  the  genitive. 72.  Qnaram 

qnae  etc. ;  and  Deiopea,  who  {is)  the  fairest  of  these  in  form,  I will  unite  to 
you  in  lasting  wedlock,  a'id  pronounce  your  ovm.  The  nominativc,  Deiopea 
(which  is  better  authenticated  here  than  Deiopeam,  given  in  some  editions),  is 
put  by  attraction  in  the  case  of  the  relative  quae,  instead  of  the  accusfitive, 
which  would  have  been  the  regular  construction.  See  Gr.  §  206,  (6),  (b). 
Quarum  is  translated  here  as  earumque  ;  the  relative  is  a  closer  and  ncater 
connective  than  and  with  a  demonstrative  or  j^erso^ial  pronoun,  which,  how- 
ever,  the  English  idiom  often  rcquires  instcad  of  the  LcUin  relativc.  See 
Arnold'3  Lat.  Prose  Comp.,  §  67,  536 ;  Gr.  §  206,  (17).  This  preference 
for  the  relative  in  Latin  often  gives  rise  to  the  construction,  which  wc  have 
here,  of  two  rclatives  or  intcrrogatives  in  the  samc  sentence ;  as,  Cic.  Brut. 
74,  258  :  cnjns  pcncs  qnos  laus  adhucfuit.  So  also  the  frequently  recurring 
qnae  qnnm  ita  sint.  The  genitive  is  not  governed  by  Deiopeam  understood, 
but  by  the  superlative,  pulcherrima,  as  a  partitive  ;  Gr.  §  212,  R.  2.  The 
form  "  quae  (est)  pulcherrima  "  is  only  a  poetic  substitute  for  pulcherrimam : 
the  most  heautiful  ofwhom  (namely),  Deiojyea,  I  uill  join,  &c.    Comp.  x.  225. 

De-i-o-pc-a  forms  the  last  two  feet  of  the  vcrsc. 73.  Conanbio  is  scanned 

here  as  a  trisyllablc,  connuhyo,  Gr.  §  306;  Z.  §  11.  Proprius  is  a  strong 
word,  denoting  sure  and  perpetual  possession.     llor.  Sat.  2,  6,  5 ;  propria 

haec  mihi  munera  faxis. 75.  Pnlchra  prolc  ;  exphiined  by  Thiel  as  an  ab- 

lative  absolute ;  but  it  seenis  to  modify  faciat  in  the  same  way  as  if  he  had 
said  eniza  jmlchram  prolcm ;  that  she  may  make  thee  a  jmrent,  having  horm 
to  thee  (by  bearing  to  thee)  afair  offspjring.     Thus  it  is  an  abhitive  of  means. 

^76.  Hacc.     Supply  ait  or  dicit,  see  Gr.  §  209,  R.  4 ;  Z.  §  772.     Re- 

gpondco  and  dico  are  not  unfrequently  omitted. ^Tnns — Kibor ;  it  is  thy 

task  to  weigh  ichat  thou  desirest ;  that  is,  /have  not  the  responsibility  of  de- 

ciding  wliether  that  be  right  or  wrong  which  you  wish. 77.  Explorarc  ; 

to  weigh ;  to  look  into  the  nature  of  a  thing ;  referring  herc  to  its  moral 
quality.  Aeolus  will  excuse  himsclf  whcn  callcd  to  account  for  trcspass- 
ing  on  the  dominion  of  Neptune,  by  plcading  tlic  command  of  Juno,  and  his 

duty  to  her. Mihi  ctc. ;  it  is  inctimhent  on  me  to  execute  your  ordcrs. 

Capcsscrc  ;  to  lay  hold  of  with  energy,  to  cxccute  ;  see  Gr.  §  187,  5. 

Fas;  what  is  imposed  by  divine  dccrccs ;  hcrc  a  sacred  duly. 78.  Tn 

mihi.  In  ascribing  to  Juno's  interccssion  with  Jupitor  the  power  and  digni- 
ty  conferred  upou  Aeolus,  Virgil  lias  probably  followed  some  ancicnt  myth, 
in  w^hich  Jiino,  as  the  impersonation  of  the  air,  was  reprcscnted  as  cxercis- 
ing  some  influencc  over  the  wiuds  and  in  the  creation  of  a  king  under  whoso 

control  they  were  placed. Qnodenmqnc  ctc. ;  you  secure  to  me  whatsoever 

of  dominion  this  (is),  you  secure  to  me  viy  sceptre  and  Jove  (i.  e.  by  the  fa- 
vor  of  Jovc),  you  grant  me  to  rccline  at  thc  fcasts  of  ihe  gods.     Srcptra,  as 


BOOK   FIRST. 


317 


above,  57,  and  below,  253,  et  al.,  indicates  the  kingly  power  with  somewhat 
more  fulness  tlian  the  singular  number.  The  form  of  the  sceptre  may  be 
seen  in  the  woodcut,  p.  314.  For  the  case  of  epulis,  see  Gr.  §  224.  The 
term  for  table  or  feast  is  in  tbe  dafive  after  accumbere  ;  that  on  which  one 
rcclines  is  in  the  ablative,  as,  in  lecto.  The  present  indicative  bere,  concili- 
as,  das,  facis,  denotes  what  has  been,  and  still  is  being  done  by  Juno  for 

Acolus;  sce  Gr.  §  145,  2.     The  infinitive  after  dare,  as  in  6<5. 79.  Epnlis 

accanibere.     As  Aeolus  was  not  one  of  the  Olympian  gods,  tlii.s  was  the 

highest  honor  that  could  be  bestowed  upon  him. 80.  Nimbornm ;  lord 

ofstorms;  Gr.  §  213,  E.  1,  (3);  Z.  §  438. 


81-123.  The  storm  ;  the  despair  of  Aeneas,  the  losei  of  oue  ship  and  extreme  peril  of 
Lis  ■whole  floet, 

81.  Coaversa  cnspide  ;  wilh  his  inverted  spear  ;  not  with  the  point  turned 
doionward,  but  turned  from  a  vertical  to  a 
horizontal  position.  While  still  seated 
Aeolus  strikes  the  point  of  tlie  spear, 
which  he  had  previously  held  as  a  sceptre, 
resting  vertically  on  the  ground,  into  the 

side  of  the  hill. S2.  la  latns;  a  more 

vigorous  construction  for  in  latere  ;  comp. 

in  puppim  he]ow,  115. Agmine  facto  ; 

a  military  figure  ;  a  battalion  beim/  formed, 

or,  in  battle  array. 83.  Qna ;  ichere,  by 

whatever  way  ;  strictly  an  ablative  of  route, 
though  reckoned  an  adverb.     Gr.  §  191 

1  &  255,  2. S4.    Incnbnere ;    they  de- 

scended  upon_  the  sca ;  the  cxpression  im- 
plies  great  -weight  and  force.  The  verb 
in  this  sense  is  followed  by  the   dative. 

Comp.  ii.  514. Totnm ;  supply  mare,  in 

the  accusative  after  ruunt,  which  is  transi- 
tive  here,  though  intransitive  in  the  fore- 

going  sentcnce ;  they  plough  tip  the  whole  sea. 87.  — qne — qnc.     See 

note  above  on  18. Virnm  ;  the  Trojans. 89.  IVox;  the  tcrm  for  night 

in  all  languages  is  often  used  in  poetry,  as  here,  for  darkness. 90.  Poli ; 

tJie  heavens ;  polus  is  frequently  so  used. 92.    Solvantnr  Mgorc ;    are 

parahjzed  with  chilling  fear.     Cold  is  analogous  to  fear  in  its  effect  on  the 

blood.     Comp.  iii.  175,  xii.  905. 93.  Dnpiices ;  for  ambas,  boih  ;  as  in 

vii.   140,  "Si  667,   et  al.     Schirach  understands  foldcd,    clasped  hands. 

94.  Tcrqne#iatcrqnc ;  a  climax  is  usually  expresscd  in  all  languagcs  by 
t  Emn  ^  i\^  as  Grcck   pocts  somctimes  add  '■'■four  times,"  for 
■j$^  Qaeis.     Gr.  §  136,  R.  2 ;  Z.  §  133,  notc- 


thrice  ;  but 

still  great^  emphasi 

Oppetere  ;  supply  mortcW^tllFhicct  death ;  especially  as  a  warrior.     Scc  Ar 


Eurug. 


318  NOTES   ON    THE    AENEID. 

nold's  Lat.  Prose,  249,  iiote. Gentis  limits/o?-^mt;7?«  under  Gr.  §  212,  R 

2;  Z.  §  4'29. 97.  Tvdlde  ;  JJiomedes,  son  of  Ti/dcjin,  consp  cuou.s  iu  tho 

Trojan  war.     Ilis  contcst  with  Aeneas  is  dcscribcd  iu  the  Iliad,  v.  239-318. 

Aeneas  was  savel  on  this  occasion  by  Venus. Occnnibere  ;  supply  inorti; 

to  die. Canipis  ;  the  ablative  of  situation.  Scc  on  Jtaliatn,  2. 98.  Mone 

non  potnisse ;  for  the  exclamatory  infinitive  see  note  on  37.     Translate : 

that  J  could  not  have  ! 99.  Sacvns  ;  valiant ;  not  cruel  here. Acaci- 

dae ;  Acldlles,  who  was  the  son  of  Peleus  and  the  grandson  of  Aeacus^ ; 

hence  called  both  Pelides  and  Aeacides. TeiO  jacct;  literally,  lies  hy  ihe 

spear;  i.  e.  lies  slain  hy  the  spear.     Gr.  §  248,  ii. 100.  Sarpcdon,  a  Ly- 

cian  prince,  son  of  Jupiter,  was  slain  by  Patroclus  beforc  thc  walls  of  Troy. 
His  body,  by  the  command  of  Jupiter,  was  conveyed  to  Lycia.  See  Iliad, 
16,  680-683.     But  Aeneas  hcre  has  in  miud,  both  in  respect  to  Sarpedon  and 

Hector,  the  time  when  they  were  stiil  lying  slain  on  the  field. l'bi  tot 

Simois.  The  poet  has  before  him  the  passage  in  the  Twelfth  Book  of  the 
Iliad,  22-23.     The   Simois   was   a   river    near    Troy,    which    flowed    into 

the   Scamander. Correpta  snb  nndis ;  hurried  arcay  beneath  its  waves. 

102.  Jactanti;  to  him  uttering  ;  or,  as  he  uttcrs.  The  (i-iii\\(!,jactanti,  liniits 
the  whole  proposition,  procella  adversa  ferit,  and  denotes  thc  object  whose 
Interest  is  affected.  See  Gr.  §  222,  2,  (b) ;  Z.  §  408.  Jactare  here  indicates 
violent  emotion ;  comp.  ii.  588,  ix.  621,  x.  95.  As  he  iitters  such  wordt,  a 
blast,  roaring  from  the  north,  opposite  (to  the  course  of  the  ship),  strikes  the 

sail. Aqnilone  ;  frcnn  the  north ;  see  note  on  Italiam,  2,  above.     Some 

with  Thiel  niake  Aquilone  an  ablative  of  cause ;  a  blast  rendered  loud  and 

furious  by  thc  north  wind. 101.  Tniii  proram  avcrtit ;  Jahn  prefers  the 

reading  promwj  to  the  nominative  prora.  "With  the  latter  sese  must  be  sup- 
plied.  Gr.  §  229,  R.  4 ;  the  prow  tu7'7is  itself  away.  With  the  accusative 
avertit  has  for  its  subject  ea,  referring  to  procella;  it  tttrns  the  pi-oio  away  ; 
that  is,  because  the  oars  are  broken  and  ceasc  to  hold  the  head  of  the 

ship  to  the  wind,  it  turns  aside. Et  nndis  dat  latns;  a7id  exposes  the 

side  to  the  viaves;  the  ship  falls  into  the  trough  of  the  sea  and  is  immc- 
diately  struck   by  the  whole  weight  of   a   mountainous  wave,  breaking 

upon  its  side. 105.  Cnmnlo ;    t»»  a  mass;  join   with   insequitur  as  an 

hblative  of  manner. Pracrnptns ;   precipitous ;    not   broken.     A  preci» 

pice  is  called  praemptus,  because  it  is  formcd  by  the  breaking  and  fall» 
ing  away  of  the  rock  and  earth  in  fro7it.  Tlie  term  is  applied  here  to 
the  towcring  wave,  not  as  being  already  broken,  but  as  steep  and  abrupt, 

like  a  precipice. 106.    111 ;    thosc  in  one  ship :    lils ;    thosc  in  anothcr. 

Not  hi — illis,  thfse — those,  because  both  partics  are  conceived  to  be  cqually 

near  to  the  spcctator.    Comp.  bclow,  162,  hitic — hinc. Dcliisccns;  yaioi- 

ing ;   de  is  intcnsivc;   sce  Gr.  §  197,  7. lOT.  Arcnis ;  thc  samh,  not  of 

thc  shorc,  but  of  the  bottom  of  the  sca;  the  agitation  reaclies  to  thc  lowcst 

dcpths. 109.   Saxa— aras;    Gr.  §  230;    Z.  §  394. Qusic— flncUbus. 

Bupply  sunt.     Thc   rocky  islets  rcfcrrcd  to  arc  thc  Aegimuri,  SO  niilcs 


BOOK   FIRST,  319 

north  of  Carthagc. 110.   Dorsnm  immane;  -an  mimense  reef. Mari 

snmmo;  ai  the  surface  of  the  sea;  an  ablative  of  situation. 111,  Bre- 

yia  Ct  syrtes;  shoals  and  quicksands;  not  the  so-called   "Syrtes"  niajor 

and  minor  on  the  African  coast. Miserabiie  ;  Gr.  §  205,  K.  8. Visn, 

Gr.  §  276,  iii. ;  Z.  §  670. 114.  Ipsins   refers  to  Aeneas.     The  i  in   the 

genitive  here  is  short  as  in  itnius,  v.  41. A  vertice  for  desuper ;  from 

above ;  from  the  point  to  wliich  the  wave  has  risen  so  as  to  stand  vcrtical 
to  the  ship,  and   to    descend  perpcndicularly,  or  "  rirjht  down "  upon  the 

stern. ^Pontas,  equivalent  iofuctus;  hlve  our  nautical  usage  of  the  word 

"sea;"  as  in  the  expression,  "■  a  sea  strikes  the  ship." 115.  la  pnppim; 

comp.   iii   latus,    82. Excntitttr  magister ;  the  hebnsman  is  struck  from 

his  seat.      The  helmsman  or  pilot  of   Orontes'  ship  was  Leucaspis.      See 

vi.  334. 116.  Illam  ;  it;  the  ship,  in  contrast  witl\  the  persons  on  board. 

118.  Rari;  here  andthere;  it  refers  particularly  to  the  voyagers  them- 
selves  seen  struggling  in  the  sca  here  and  there,  less  numerous  than  the 

arms,  planks,    and   valuables   floating   all   about  per  imdas. 121.  Qna 

vectns  (est)  Abas,  (the  one)  in  which  Abas  sailed. 122.  Vicit ;  has  over- 

powered;  either  by  driving  theni  away  at  the  niercy  of  winds  and  waves, 
or  by  casting  them  ou  rocks  and  sands.     It  does  not  mean  destroyed,  for  all 

were  saved  except  the  ship  of  Orontes. Laxis  compagibns ;  ihe  joints  be- 

ing  loosened.     Gr.  §  257,  R.  7  ;  Z.  §  645. Omnes;  supply  naves. 123. 

[mbrem;  here  for  aquam;  a  poetic  usage  of  the  word. Bimis  fatiscnnt ; 

^tart  opcn  in  cracks. 

124-156.  Neptune  hears  the  storm  raging  on  the  surface  of  tho  sea,  and  is  Indignant 
Ihat  Aeolus  has  sent  the  winds  to  invade  his  dominion  without  his  authority.  He  riseB 
in  his  chariot  to  the  top  of  the  waves,  rebukes  and  disperses  the  winds,  and  rescues 
the  Trojan  ships. 

124.  Misceri ;  to  be  agitated. 125.  Emissam  hiemem ;  a  storm  to  have 

heen  sent  forth ;  namely,  from  the  land,  by  Aeolus.— — 126.  Stagna ;  the 
waters  near  the  bottom  of  the  sea  are  not  disturbed  by  ordinary  winds ; 
hence  they  are  called  here  standing,  or  still  wafers.  These  are  now  thrown 
up,  literally,  poured  back,  from  the  bottoni  to  the  surfacc,  by  the  violent 
agitation  of  the  whole  mass  of  waters.  Translate  thus :  In  the  mean  time 
Neptune  perceived  with  deep  displeasure  that  the  sea  was  agitated  with  a  loud 
uproar,  that  a  storm  had  been  sent  forth,  and  that  the  deep  waters  had  been 

thrown  up  from  the  very  bottom  (imis  vadis). V^adis  ;  the  ablative  after 

refusa.     Wagner  has  shown  that  verbs  compounded  with  re  often  govern 

the  ablative.    Comp.  358,  v.  99,  ix.  32,  x.  330. Gravitcr  commotns ;  deep- 

iy  indignant ;  not  vehcmcnter  conciiatus,  violenthj  agiiated,  or  roused  to 
fury ;  it  is  the  deep  and  stern  displeasure  of  a  god,  conscious  of  his  supreme 
power,  and  calmly  exercising  his  authority  to  restraiu  or  punish,  witliout 
any  exicrnal  excitcment.  Hence  placidmn  copnt,  in  tlie  next  verse,  is  not 
at  all  inconsistent  with  graviter  commotus.  Cicero  sliows  the  distinction  he- 
twccn  commotus  and  concitatus  in  Brut.  65,  202 :  (Cotta)  iinpcUcbat  aniini>.' 


320 


KOTES   ON   THE   AENElD. 


tractando,  ut  idem  facerent  a  sc  commoti,  quod  a  Sulpicio  concltati.     Thej 

wcre  moved  by  Cotta,  roused  by  Sulpicius. AitO  prospiciens  ;  looking  forth 

upon  ihe  dccp ;  alto  is  the  dativc  for  in  altum.  Cacsar  gives  us  the  prose 
construction  De  Bel.  Civ.  2,  5  :  prospieere  in  urbem.  Tlie  dative  also  occurs 
bclow  181  aftcr  thc  \cvha\  prospccfujn,  where  vre  hare  pelar/o,  for  in  pe- 
lagua.  The  translation  some-times  given,  "lookiug  forth //•om  thc  tlecp," 
is  thercfore,  incorrect ;  it  would  be  thc  constructioa  after  stispiccre  rather 

than  prospicerc. 129.  Cocliqnc  rnina  ;  bi/  tkc  destructive  forcc  ofthe  air , 

a  forciblc  expression  for  the  siniple  tcrm  vcjitis,  ■nliich  would  have  becn  the 
prosaic  antithcsis  to  fluctibus.     Such  departures  from  common  forms  of  ex- 

pression  are  essential  to  tbe  poetic  style  in  all  languagcs. 130.  Fratrem. 

Ncptune  and  Juno  were  both  children  of  Saturn.  Nor  did  the  wilcs  and  the 
anger  of  Juno  lie  hid  from  her  brothcr.     That  this  storm  had  been  brought 


Family  of  Tritons 
about  by  thc  stratagcms  of  Juno,  was  at  oncc  apparcnt  to  Neptunc.     The 

accusative  after  latcre  is  mostly  poetic. 131.  Eurum  Zcphyrnmquc.     All 

the  wjnda  are  implied  here,  thougli  only  two  arc  mcnlioned. Ad  SC ;  Gr. 

§  225,  iv.  K.  1. Dehlnc,  is  scanned  as  one  syliable,  d^iiinc.     Gr.  §  306, 

(2);  Z.  §  11. 133.  Gcneris,  docs  not  rcfer  to  thek  origin,  but  to  their 

character  and  power,  as  a  class  of  beings.     Ilas  such  confidcncc  (assurance)  in 

your  race  j)osscssedyou? 133.  Jam  ;  now  at  length ;  that  is,  liaving  bccn 

prcsuniptuous  in  othcr  ways,  lias  it  now  come  to  tliis? 135.  Qnos  ego — . 

For  the  figurc  of  aposiopcsis,  sce  Gr.  g  S'2t,  33;  Z.  §  758.  "  Whom  /— ." 
Thc  rcmaindcr  of  tlic  thrcat,  will  chastise,  is  left  une.xpresscd,  becausc  ii  i$ 
better  (now)  to  altay  the  rxcitcd  waves. Pracstat;  it  is  bettcr ;  an  iniper- 


BOOK    FIRST. 


321 


aonal  verb. 136.  Post — Inctls ;  hereaftcr  you  will  expiate  your  deeds  to 

me  by  a  different  punishmcnt. 139.  Sortc.     The  wbole  kingdom  of  Saturn 

was  allotted  to  Jupiter,  Neptuue  and  Pluto ;  the  former  receiving  heaven, 

Ncptune  the  watcr,  and  Pluto  the  regions  under  the  earth. 140-141. 

Anla — regnct ;  let  hini  display  his  power  {se  jactet)  in  that  court,  and  rule 
supreme  {regnet)  in  the  shut  up  prison  of  the  winds.  This  is  spoken  with 
contempt,  which  is  implied  especially  in  the  expression  clauso  carcere,  ai 

contrasted  with  the  wide  dominion  of  Neptune. Enrns  alone  is  mentioned 

by  name,  though  vestras  shows  that  all  the  winds  are  addressed.— — 142. 

DictO ;    Gr.  §  256,  R.  9  ;  Z.  §  484.. 141.  idnixns  is  instead  of  the  usual 

construction  in  the  plural,  adnixi ;  it  refers  both  to  the  Nereid  Cymothoe 
and  to  the  sca  god,   Triton.     Gr.  §  205,  Exc.  to  R.  2.     The  above  is  a 
representation  of  a  family  of  Tritons  from  a  beautiful  antique  gem. 
145.  Scopnlo.     This  is  the  same  as  the  saxa  latentia,  above,  lOS.     For  the 

case,  see  Gr.  §  242. 146.  Apcrlt  syrtes;  opens  the  sand ;  the  arfffer  arc- 

nae  mentioned    in   112. 147.  Botis;  in  his  chariot. 148.  Ac  vclnti. 

The  poet  has  in  mind  such  scenes  as  often  transpired  in  the  Roman  forum 

in  his  own  day. Saepe  implies  quod  saepe  accidit ;  as  often  happens. 

Comp.    X.  723. 150.      Observe   the   caesura   here  in  the   fourth  foot. 

Ariaa  refers  to  faces  et  saxa.  Their  fury  seizes  such  arms  as  stones  and  fire- 
brands  only ;  because  no  citizen  was  allowed  to  carry  warlike  weapons  with- 

in  the  walls  of  Rome. 151.  Pietate  gravcm  ac  meritis ;  revered  on  accouni 

of  his  relipious  purify,  anc?  (public)  sovjfcs. 152.  Adstant;  stand  fxed. 

155.    Invectns ;    bome    along  in  the  open  air ;    the  participle   pcrfect 

used  as  a  present ;  see  Madvig,  §  431,  b. 156.  Cnrrn — secnndo ;  gives 

the  reins  to  his  swiftly  gliding  chariot.  Curru  is  the  contracted  form  of  the 
dative,  currui.  Gr.  §  89,  3.  Others  regard  it  here  as  an  ahlative,  joined 
with  volans,  supplying  equis  in  the  dative  after  dat. 


N^f  tune  calminn;  the  eeh. 


322  NOTES   ON    THE    AENEID. 

157-222.  Aeneas  with  seven  of  his  Bliipe  lands  in  a  Becure  haven,  not  far  from  tli» 
new  city  of  Cartliige.  Leaving  liis  compauions  a  while,  he  ascends  the  neighborina 
roclvs  to  obtalu  a  vicw  of  the  sca,  in  the  hope  of  descrying  the  rest  of  his  flcet.  He 
falla  in  with  a  herd  of  decr,  and  tlius  securcB  food  for  his  friends,  whom  he  addrcsees, 
on  roturning,  with  consoliiig  words. 

157.  Aeoeadae.     Followers  of  Aeneas.     Gr.   §   100,  i.  (3). Qnae — 

Utora.     Gr.  §  20G,  (3).     The  shores  which  are  nearcst.     Supply  sunt.     See 

Gr.  §  209,  R.  4 ;  Z.  §  776. 158.  Libyae.  The  country  around  Carthage  was 

strictly  Africa;   Lihya  was  the  region   between  Africa  and  Egypt;    but 

the   poets  use  geographical  terms   with   great   freedom. 159.    Seeessa 

longo ;  in  a  deep  recess.  It  is  not  likely  that  Virgil  is  describing  a  real 
scene  on  the  African  coast,  though  some  have  tried  to  identify  the  spot. 

IGO.  Insnla — laternm;  an  island  fortns  a  haven  hy  the  opposition  ofits 

sides.     Lying  aloug  in  front  of  the  cove,  and  against  (o6)  the  sea,  it  forms  a 

natural  breakwater. Qaibns,  the  ahlative,  means  oifrangitur  and  scindit: 

hy  which  every  wave  from  the  dcep  is  hroken,  and  divides  itself  into  the  deep 
windings  of  the  hay ;  that  is,  rolls  broken,  and  so  with  diminished  force, 
into  the  haven.     Ueyne,  however,  understands  by  rcductos  sinus  the  "re- 

ceding  curves"  formed  by  the  wave  itself. 162.  Dinc  atqae  hinc;  on  this 

side  and  on  this ;  on  either  side  ;  not  hinc  atque  illinc,  because  thc  two 

points  are  conceived  to  be  equally  near  to  the  spectator. Gemiui ',  two 

similar  cliffs  ;  two  rocky  promontories,  forming  the  opposite  extremities  or 

headlands  of  the  cove. 164.  Tnni — nnibra;  al  the  saim  time  a  curtain 

of  woods  wiih  ylanciny  foliage,  and  a  mass  of  trces  dark  with  roughening 
shadoto  overhang  from  above.  The  rocky  hoights  which  form  the  sides  and 
back  part  of  the  haven  are  crowned  all  arouud  with  dark  masses  of  trees, 
whose  foliage,  agitated  by  the  wind,  aud  constantly  varying  in  light  ana 
shade,  is  described  as  glancing  in  tlie  light,  or  coruscating.  Virgil  appliea 
the  term  scena,  stage-view,  to  this  landscape,  becausc  it  resembles  the  stage 
of  the  Roman  theatre,  when  prepared  for  the  sports  of  fauns  and  satyrs. 
For  on  such  occasions  the  side  walls  of  the  stage,  which  in  the  Roman  the- 
atre  curved  towards  thc  middle,  and  the  back  wall,  wliich  was  straight,  wcre 
decoratcd  wiih  paintings  or  painted  hangings  of  trces  and  glades  to  reprcscnt 

a  sylvan  sccnc. Sllvis  cornscis  \  an  ablative  of  quality  or  description ;  usu- 

ally  rendercd  likc  the  gcnitive :  offlaxhing  woods.  See  Gr.  §  211,  R.  6  ;  Z. 
§  471,  note.  Tiie  usagc  is  describcd  by  Madvig  thus:  The  ablativc  of  a 
substantive  conibincd  with  an  adjectivc  (participle  or  prououn)  is  fcubjoined 
to  a  substantive  by  way  of  description  cither  directly  or  after  the  vcrb  esse, 
to  denote  the  quality  and  character  of  a  person  or  thing.     Madv.  §  272. 

105.  l)csnpcr;/)Wrt  above ;  in  contrast  with  sub  vcrtice. Horrenti; 

I  prefer  the  iitei'al  meaning,  rongh,  hristling,  projecting,  according  to  Wag- 
ner's  interprctation,  as  more  appropriatc  hero  than  the  translation  gloomy, 
awc-inspiring,  which  is  morc  gcnorally  given.— \cnins  is  addcd  to  sccua 

by  way  oi  epcxcgcsis,  or  morc  claboratc  do.scriplion. 166.  Frontc  snb  ad- 

vcrs."l ;  htncath  the  hroic  of  thc  cliffs  npp,txlic ;  opposifc,  namely,  to  onc  cu 


BOOK    FIRST.  323 

tering  the  bay ;    therefore  eituated  at  the  inmost  point  of  the  bay. 

Scopalis  pcadentibns ;      of  overhanging  rocks  ;    cliffs  overhanging  so  as  to 

form  a.  grotto. 16Tt  Yivo;  natural,unquarried. Saxo,  the  aljlative  of 

quality,    as    in    164;  seats  of  living  rock. 1'nco — morsn;  with  crooked 

fiuke.     Sce  the  description  of  the  anchor  in  Smith's  Dic.  Antiq.,  p.  58.     In 

the  Homeric  period  stones  were  used  for  anchors. ITl.  Snbit.     This 

verb  often  expresses  the  idea  of  approaching  a  lofty  object,  such  as  a  liill, 

the  wall  of  a  city,  or  as  here,  a  bold  shore. Amore.     Ablat.  of  manner. 

Gr.  §  247  ;  Z.  §  472. 1T3.  Tabentcs;  drenched. In  lltore  ;  Gr.  §  241, 

R.  5. 1T4.  Silici.     Gr.  §  224,  R.  2.     First  Achates  struck  a  spark  from 

the  flint.,  and  caught  the  fire  i:i  leaves,  and  placed  dry  materials  around  (it), 
and  rapidly  roused  the  flame  in  the  dry  wood.  Literally,  seized  the  fiame  in 
the  dryfuel.  Wagner  fancies  that  the  process  oi  sioinging  the  combustibles 
rapidly  round  with  the  hand,  after  they  were  partially  ignited,  is  signified  by 

the  words  rapuit  in  foniite  fiammam. ITT.  Cererem;  the  w/ieat. 

Cerealia  arma;  ntensils  for  preparing  the  wheat.     Gr.  §  128,  i.  2  (a). 

1T8.  Fessi  rernm;  weary  with  their  fortunes.     Gr.  §  213,  R.  2;  Z.  §  437. 

Receptas;  recovered;  i.  e.  from  the  eea. 1T9.  Torrere;  to  roast ;  in 

order  to  prepare  it  the  better  for  crushing  with  the  stonc. 181.  Pelago; 

dative  for  in  pelagus;  it  Wxnxia  prospectum,  a  verhal  from  prospicere  ;  a  view 

far  seaward;  a  prospect  far  andwide  over  the  sea.     See  above,  on  126. 

Anthea.     Gr.  §  86. Si  qnem  ;  in  agreement  with  Anthea;  whether  he  may 

sce  any  (one  as)  Antheus.,  &c. ;  the  idea  is :  if  he  might  see  any  one,  as,  for 

example,  Antheus ;  comp.  iv.  828. Si  is  bere  interrogative  (Gr.  §  198, 

ii.  11,  R.  e;  Z.  §  354,  end),  and  connects  some  clause  understood,  as  tit  se 
certio7-em  faciat,  with  tbe  following  videat :  to  ascertain  whether  he  may  sce  ; 

comp.  E.  6,  56,  57;  and  below,  322. 182.  Phrygias ;  Trojan.     As  Troy 

was  included  in  what  was  often  called  Phrygia  Minor,  the  Roman  poets  fre- 

quently  use  the  term  Phrygius  for  Trojanus. Biremes ;  for  ships  in  gen- 

eral.  For  the  forra  of  Roman  ships  see  woodcut  at  the  beginning  of  notes 
on  Book  3d. — r-183.  Arma.  Perhaps  the  shields  were  fastened  on  the 
stern  and  eides  of  Jhe  ship,  as  was  the  custom  in  the  middle  ages ;  the  shield 
of  the  commandcr  being  conspicuous  by  the  device  emblazoned  on  its  front. 

185.  Armenta.     Thc  plural  is  designcd  merely  to  indicate  a  large  num- 

ber,  not  a  herd  to  eacli  of  the  leaders,  or  stags.      Mliole  herds  foUoiv  these 

from  behind,  and  the  extended  trainfeeds  along  the  valleys. 186.  A  tergo. 

"The  preposition  a  or  ab  frequently  dcnotes  the  side  on  which  somethiug 

happens,  or,  rather,  from  whence  it  proceeds."     Z.  §  304,  b. 190.  Corni- 

bns  arboreis.     Join  with  alta:  high  with  branching  horns ;  comp.  viii.  417. 

— — Yulgns;  the  herd,  sxs  opposed  to  ductores. 192.  Yictor ;  viciorious. 

Verbals  in  tor  are  often  usei  adjectively.     Gr,  §  129,  8 ;  Z.  §  102,  note  2. 

193.  Fiaidiit  et  aequet.     The  subjunctive  impUes  not  only  that  he  does 

aot  actually  cease,  but  that  he  does  not  intend  to  ccase  from  the  chase,  bc- 
fore  he  has  killed  the  sevcn.     See  Gr.  §  2G3,  3. Uami;  Gr.  §  221,  R.  3  ; 


324  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

Z.  §  400. 191.  Uiat  —  poslea ;    llicreiipon. 195.  Doinde ',   usually  a 

dissyllable  in  poetry ;  dein-de.     In  prose  the  order  would  be,  DeiiuJe  vina 

quae  bonus  Ace.ites  heros,  sq.     Comp.  iii.  G09.     Botius  ;  ffcnerous. Citdis; 

dative  for  thc  prosaic  construction  in  tlie  accusative,  with  ablative  of  quae : 
quibus  cados  onerarat :  with  which  (wines)  he  had  loadcd  the  casks.  Coinp. 
viii.  180.  The  amphorae,  or  large  jars  with  two  handles,  in  which  wine 
was  usually  kcpt,  are  meant  by  cadis ;  see  page595.  Acestes,  the  son  of  a 
Trojan  woman  named  Segesta,  dwelt  in  the  western  part  of  Sicily,  and  had 
hospitably  entertained  Aeneas  and  his  followers  there  duringthe  winterjnst 

passed. 196.  Abcnntibns;  to  them  {{\\q  Iro^VLns)  luhcn  departing  ;  uamelf, 

iit  the  comniencement  of  their  present  voyage,  as  described  above,  34. 

198.  Enlni  givcs  the  ground  of  some  proposition  understood.  as,  "  We  must 

not  despair,"  or,  "I  liave  reason  to  encourage  you." Ante  malornm;  o/ 

fonner  evils ;  equivalent  to  praeteritorum  malorum ;  sce  Gr.  §  205,  R.  11, 
(b).     After  ante  there  is  strictly  an  ellipsis  of  quae  accidcruiit ;  see  Gr. 

§  277,  R.  1 ;  Z.  §  262,  note. 200.  Scyllacam— exporti.     See  iii.  554,  where 

their  approach  to  Scylla  and  Charybdis,  and  their  meeting  with  the  Cyclops, 

Polyphemus,  arc  dcscribed. Scyllaeam  rabicm  ;  the  rage  of  Scylla.     We 

shall  find  adjectives  derived  from  proper  uames  very  often  substituted  for 
the  genitive  case ;  as,  Hectoreum  corpus,  ii.  543 ;  Herculeo  amictu,  vii.  669 ; 

eee  Z.  §  C84. 201.  Acccstis,  for  accessistis.     Gr.  §  162,  (c);  Z.  §  160,  2. 

203.  Et  baec ;  these  s^ifferings  also ;  these  we  now  endure  as  well  aa 

those  I  have  just  mentioned. Et  is  not  often  uscd  in  the  sense  of  etiam, 

and  when  translated  by  "  also,"  there  is  almost  invariably  an  ellipsis  of  an  ct 
preceding,  as  here ;  et  illa,  quae  dixi,  et  haec.         201.  Discrimina  rernm  ; 

perils  of  fortune.     Discrimen  is  the  decisive  point,  the  crisis  of  affairs. 

205.  Tendimns.     Supply  iter  or  cursum,  which  are  often  omittcd  after  thia 

verb.      We  hold  our  way. Fata — ostendnnt.     The  fates  have  bcen  re- 

vealed  to  Aeneas  by  the  ghost  of  Hector,  ii.  295  ;  and  by  that  of  Creusa,  ii. 
781 ;  by  the  oracle  at  Delos,  iii.  94;  by  the  vision  of  the  Penates,  iii.  163;  by 
thc  prophecies  of  Cassandra,  iii.  183;  by  that  of  thc  harpy  Caelaeuo,  iii.  253 ; 

and  by  that  of  Ilelenus,  iii.  374. 206.  Illic — Trojac  ;  thcre  it  is  rightfor 

the  realms  of  Troy  to  risc  again.     Fas  is  propcrly  tliat  which  is  right  accord- 

ing  to  divine  laws,  or  in  the  sight  of  God. 208.  Acgcr;  despondlng. 

809.     Observe  the  emphasis  given  to  .'<pem  rultu  and  corde  dolorcm,  both  by 

Iheir  position  in  Ihe  vcrse  and  by  the  rcversed  order  of  thc  words. 210. 

Daitibns.     Gr.  §  94.     Tlic  caesura  hcre.occurs  in  tlic  4th  foot. 211, 

Tergora — nndant ;  Ihcg  sirip  thc  hides  from  the  ribs,  and  la>/  bare  the  flesh. 

Costis  denotes  herc  the  carcasci?,  and   visccra  the   fleshy  parts,  or  all 

within   the  hidc ;   comp,   viiL   180. 212.  Pars,  ns  a  collective  noun,  is 

followcd  here  hy  a  verb  in  the  plural,     Gr.  §  209,  R.  11.     Tiie  singidar 

nunibcr,  howcvcr,  i,s  the  rcgiilar  construction  in  Latin. Trementia ;  cven 

while  still  quivering. 213.  Acna;  bron::c  vcsscls.     Such  have  boen  found 

at  Poinpcii  raore  frcqucntly  than  those  of  iron.     Tho  wator  was  hcatcd,  savs 


BOOK    FIRST.  325 

Servius,  not  for  cooking  any  portion  of  the  flesb,  for  boiling  was  not  then 
practised,  but  for  washing  the  hands.     Perhaps,  however,  the  poet  had  in 

mind,  as  is  frequently  the  case,  the  customs  of  his  own  times. 214-15. 

Fasi — fermae»  And,  reclincd  along  the  grass,  ihey  fill  ihemselves  (lit.,  are 
being  filled)  with  old  wine,  and  the  fat  game.     After  ferinae  supply  carnis; 

see  Gr.  §  205,  R.  7,  (1). Bacchi  is  put  for  wine,  as  above,  177,  Ceres  for 

wheat.     So  frequently  Vulcan  for  fire,  Jupiter  for  the  sky,  &c.     For  the 

genitive  after  implentur,  sec  Gr.  §  220,  3 ;  Z.  §  463. 216.  Postqnam,  and 

other  adverbs  of  tiuie,  when  they  signify  as  sopn  as,  are  followed  by  the 
perfect  (or  impcrfect)  rather  than  by  the  pluperfcct.     Gr.  §  259,  R.  1,  (2), 

(d);  Z.  §  507,  b. Measae  remotae;    the  viands  were  removed ;  literally, 

the  tahles.  The  expression  is  dcrived  not  from  the  practice  of  the  lieroic, 
but  from  that  of  the  Augustan  age,  when  light,  movable  tables  were  oftcn 
used,  on  which  the  food  was  brought  into  the  triclinium,  and  placed  before 
the  guests.     See  woodcut,  page  360.     Hence  the  removal  of  tables  came  to 

signify  the  removal  of  the  food. 21.7.  Amissos— reqairnat ;  they  mourn 

in  continued  conversation  their  ^nissing  friends.     JRequirunt  here  is  very 

nearly  desiderant,  regret. 218.    Credant  depends  on  dubii.     Gr.  §  265. 

Sen  and  siye  are  used  by  poetic  license  for  utrum  and  an,  ivhether,  or. 

219.  Extrema  pati ;  that  they  are  si(fferi7ig  the  last ;  that  they  are  dying. 

Vocatos ;  when  called.  Perhaps  Virgil  alludes  to  the  custom  of  pronouncing 
the  word  vale  over  the  body  of  the  dead,  as  soon  as  he  had  ceased  to  breathe, 

and   also  at  the  funeral  pyre,  when  the  body  had  been  burned. 220. 

Oronti.     Gr.  §   86. 221.     Secnm  ;  with  himself  because,  as  meutioned 

above,    209,    he  disguises  his  grief  from  his  foUowers. 

223-305.  A  scene  in  Olympus.  Vcnus  appears  before  Jupiter,  while  hc  is  contem- 
plating  the  aflairs  of  men,  and  with  tears  complains  of  the  hardships  of  Aeneas,  who 
is  debarred,  through  the  anger  of  Juno.  from  his  destined  home  iu  Italy,  in  spite  of  his 
piety,  and  the  fatcs,  and  the  promises  of  Jupiter,  while  Antenor,  another  Trojan 
prince,  has  been  permitted  already  to  find  a  resting-place  on  the  shores  of  tho  Adriat- 
ic.  Jupiter  consoles  her  by  reaflirming  the  promise  that  she  shall  hereaftcr  receive 
her  son  into  Olympus,  and  that  his  descendants  in  Italy,  the  Romans,  shall  rule  the 
world.  Mercury  is  then  sent  down  to  Carthage,  iu  order  to  exercise  a  secret  influenco 
on  queen  Dido  and  the  Carthagiuians,  that  they  may  be  prepared  to  give  the  Trojana 
a  friendly  reception. 

223.  Finis ;  an  end,  i.   e.   of  their  mournful  convcrsation. Aethere 

{nmmo;  from  the  summit  of  the  sky ;  or  Olympus.     For  the  casc,  sce  Gr. 

§242. 224.  Despiciens;  looking  downward;  the  opposite  o?  suspicicns, 

looking  upward.      Gr.    §  197,   7. ^\'eUvolnm;    studded  with  sails.      The 

tcrm  is  more  commonly  applicd  to  thc  ship  "  flying  with  sails,"  but  ia 
here  transferred  to  the  sea  itself.-^— Jacentes  ;  spread  ov.t ;  as  they  would 

appear  when  seen  from  a  great  height  above. 225.  Latos  popnlos  =•  late 

habitantes  ;  the  nations  dwellingfar  andwide. Sic  recalls  dcspiciens,  and 

is  virtually  a  repetition  of  it :  thus  (looking  downward  I  say).  Comp.  vii. 
663,   •«'iii.    488. 2f6»  ronstltU;    he  sfood. R?gHis.     Either  dative  oi 


326  NOTES   ON    THE    AENEID. 

ablative  Virgil  uscs  both  cases  after  defigere,  but  the  ablative  is  the  more 
frcqucnt;  comp.  xii.  130.  Defigo,  jiono,  statiio,  conslJo,  vnefgo,  take  the 
ablative  when  the  idea  of  rcst  is  prominent.     See  also  Gr.  §  2-tl,  R.  6 ;  Z. 

g  490. 227.  Tales — curas;  meditating  upoti  such  carcs ;  such,  namely,  a9 

are  occasioned  by  the  prescnt  conditiou  of  Aeneas,  in  Libya,  to  which  cspe- 
cially  Jupiter  has  turned  his  attention,  while  he  stands  "  on  the  summit  of 

heaven." 228.  Tristior  (^Ma??i  so/jto) ;  verysad;  with  unwontcd  sadness, 

for  she  was  by  distinction  the  smiling  goddess. Ocnlos ;  the  accusative  of 

eynecdoche,  or  "Greek  accusative,"  limiting  siiffusa;  litqrally,  suffusedas  to 
her  eyes.     We  ehall  meet  with  this  construction  very  frequently  in  poetry. 

Gr.  §  234,  ii.  R.  2 ;  Z.  §  458. 229-30.  0  qui — terrcs.     0  thou  who  rulesi 

the  affairs  both  of  nien  and  of  gods  with  thy  eternal  commands,  and  dost  ter- 
rifii  with  thy  thunderbolts.  The  statues  of  Jupiter  often  represent  him  as 
holding  a  sceptre  in  one  hand,  and  in  the  other  a  thunderbolt.  The  latter 
was  to  the  ancient  poets  the  most  forcible  symbol  of  his  power  and  ven- 
geance  ;  comp.  Ilorace,  0.  i.  3,  38.     Neque  per  nostrum  paiimur  scelus  Ira- 

cunda  Jovem  ponere  fulmina.     Comp.  also  iv.  208. ^231.  Quid;  what  of- 

fence. In;  against;  in  this  eense  it  is  followed  by  the  accusative. 

232.  Quibus ;  dative  after  clauditur  ;  to  whrnn  the  whole  world  is  closed. 

Fnnera ;  disastcrs.     Funera  significs  here  not  only  deatlis,  but  other  great 

calamities. 233.  Ob  Italiam;  because  of  lialy ;  because  Juno  desires  to 

keep  them  away  from  Italy,  and  so  prevent  the  founding  of  the  Roman  em- 

pire. Chinditnrt     In   prose   the   subjunctivc   claudatur  would  be   used 

here;  see  Gr.  §  264,  1,  (b),  &  Z.  §  558;  for  quibus  after  tantum  would 
generally  have  the  force  of  ut  iis,  and  be  followed  by  the  suhjunctive.  Tho 
indicativc  presents  the  circumstancc  more  vividly  as  an  actual  fact,  not  as  a 

conciivcd  conscq%micc. 234.  IIinc;/rom  hence,from  thcm;  rcfcrring  to 

Aeneas  and  the  Trojans,  and  equivalent  to  ab  his. Olini ;  hereafter. 

Volventibns  aunis;  supply  se;  ablative  absolute;  inilie  course  of  revolving 

ycars,  or  ages.     The  participle  is  uscd  in  a  passive  or  reflexive  sense. 

235.  Fore;  woidd  arise.     Gr.  §  154,  R.  3.     It  is  here  equivalent  to  orituivs 

cxsc. RcTOf  ato ;  restored  or  re-established,     The  blood  or  race  of  Teucer, 

the  Crctan  anccstor  of  the  Trojans,  has  wcll-nigli  perishcd  in  thc  fall  of 
Troy ;  Jupiter  has  promiscd  that  it  sliall  be  revivcd  in  Italy  through  Aeneas 
aiid  his  followers.— -— 236.  Omnl  dicionc ;  with  unlimitcd  siray.     Omni  ira- 

plies  that  nothing  whatcver  sliall  be  wanting  to  their  absolute  power. 

Qui  tcnercnt ;  what  wouUI  be  thc  tense  and  mode  in  thc  oratio  recta?     See 

below,    287. 237.    Pollicitns.      The  best  authoritics  make  poUicitus 

liere  a.  participle,  and  uot  pollicitus  es,  as  indicatcd  by  the  punctuatiou  iu 
Bome  editions.  With  our  punctuation,  we  must  consider  thc  7iominative  as 
a  substitute  for  thc  accusative  agrcoing  with  ie,  and  translate  as  if  the  ,scn- 
tcnce  were,  cerie  liomanos  fore  duciores  jyoUiciium  quae  ic  sententia  vertit; 
what  purpose  has  changed  ihee,  0  father,  having  (oncc)  promised  that  from 
(his  sonrcc  fhcre  shouhl  spring  Roman  lcadcrs,  &o.  ?     This  iniperfection  in 


BOOK    FIRST.  327 

tbe  Btructure  of  a  sentence,  which  arises  from  haste  and  excitement,  caus»- 
ing  the  speaker  to  begin  with  one  construction  and  end  with  a  diflerent  one, 

is  called  anacoluthon;  see  Gr.  §  323,  3,(5). 238.  Hoc;  ablat.  with  this ; 

supply  promisso. Occasnm — sslabar ;   /  wax  consoling  the  fall  aml  sad 

ruins  of  Troy ;  instead  of  me  solahar  de  occasu;  I  was  consoling  mysclf  for 
thefall.  After  solor  either  the  accusative  of  ihe  person  exercising  the  feel- 
ing,  or  of  the  emotion  itself,  or,  as  here,  the  acc.  of  that  which  causes  tbe 

emotion,  may  be  used.     Comp.  A.  x.  829,  xii.  110. 239.  Fatis,  ablative 

of  price.     Supply  meliorihus,  or  aliis ;  with  other  (pr  propiticns)  fates ;  their 

promised  liingdom  iu  Italy. Contraria;  advcrse. Repcndens;  halanc- 

ing,  or  offsetting. 240.  Nnuc  is  emphatic,  even  now,  when  we  had  a  right 

to  look  for  better  fortunes. 242.  Antenor ;  a  Trojan  prince,  nephew  of 

king  Priam.  He  escaped  from  Troy,  and  followed  by  a  large  number  of  He- 
neti  of  Paphlagonia,  as  well  as  by  some  of  his  own  countrymen,  he  landed 
at  the  north-western  part  of  the  gulf  of  Venice,  and  founded  the  city  of 
Patavium,  or  Padua.     Livy  (1.  1,  c.  1)  says  the  place  where  he  first  landed 

was  cijlled  Troja,  and  his  new  nation  the  Veneti. Tntus ;  safe ;  notwith- 

standing  the  warlike  character  of  the  Hlyrians  and  the  Liburni,  and  the  dan- 

gers  of  the  navigation. 244.  Snperare;   to  pass  hy. Timavi.      This 

little  stream,  the  importance  of  which  was  much  exaggerated  by  ancient 
writers,  is  a  few  miles  north-west  of  Trieste.  It  is  thus  described  in  Murray's 
Handbook  for  Southern  Germany:  "Near  San  Giovanni  the  sources  of  the 
Timao  (the  classic  Timavus)  burst  out  of  the  foot  of  a  bare  rock  from  under 
the  road  in  a  vast  volume,  and  form  at  once  a  river,  which  after  a  course  of 
a  mile  enters  the  Adriatic.  (Hence  Antenor  is  said  to  pass  by  ihe  founfain.) 
The  number  of  sources  (ora)  is  variously  stated :  a  recent  traveller  mentions 
4 ;  Strabo  speaks  of  7  ;  Virgil  9.     It  is  believed  that  these  sources  are  the 

outlet  of  a  river  which  buries  itself  in  the  mountain  at  St.  Canzian." 

245.  Vasto — montis.     See  above,  note  on  55. 246.  It — sonanti;  it  rolls 

(as)  a  dashing  sea ;  and  covers  the  fields  with  its  sounding  flood.  It  seems 
natural  to  explain  mare  as  in  apposition  with  fons;  but  some  of  the  best 
critics  make  proruptum  the  supine  after  it,  and  mare  either  the  object  of  the 

supine  or  of  in  understood;  it  goes  to  break  the  sea;  or  into  the  sea. 

247.  Hic  tamcn;  here  nevertheless ;  that  is,  though  he  encountered  these 
perils  in  coasting  the  Adriatic,  yet  here,  in  this  region,  he  founded  the  cily 

of  Patavium  and  the  dwellings  of  Trojans. Patavi.     On  the  case,  Gr. 

§  204,  R.  6 :  on  the  crasis,  Gr.  §  306,  (5). 248.  Nomen ;  he  called  the 

nation  Veneti,  gave  name  to  the  nation;  see  note  on  242.  Or  it  may  be 
understood,  he  gave  his  own  name  to  the  nation,  calUng  them  Antenoridae. 

Ai'ma  fixit ;  suspended  his  arms.     In  token  of  gratitude  for  the  success- 

ful  achievement  of  his  enterprise  and  the  termination  of  his  wars,  he  fastened 

his  arms  to  the  walls  or  pillars  of  the  temple  of  his  patron  deity. 249. 

Compostns,  for  compositus.  Gr.  §  322,  4.  This  verb  often  denotes,  as  here, 
the  last  offices  performed  in  the  scpulture  of  the  dead,  implying  especially 


328  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

the  dcpositing  of  thc  body,  or  of  thc  fuDoral  nrn,  in  thc  tonib ;  buried  ht 
rests  in  peace.  It  is  forcing  thc  languagc  too  niuch  from  its  usage,  to  make 
it  rcfer  to  the  tranquil  old  age,  rather  than  the  death  of  Antcnor.— — 250. 
Nos,  expresses  forcibly  the  maternal  feeling  of  Venus,  which  makes  the  in- 
tercst  of  Acncas  her  own,  and  placcs  her,  as  it  wcre,  among  his  companions 

in  suffering. Coeiiarfeni;  t/ie  abode  of  keaven ;  Olympus.     Thc  poets  are 

fond  of  designating  it  by  such  expressions  as  arx  cocli,  aetherea  dotnus,  luci- 

dae  sedcs,   irfneae   arccs,   and  the  hke. Annnis  arcem ;  thou  promisest ; 

Htcrally,  thou  noddcst  to.     Jupiter  has  at  sonie  tinic  promiscd  that  Aeneas 

shall  be  received  into  heaven  after  his  death. 251.  Infiindani ;  0  wrong 

unutterable!     Exclamations,  either  with  or  without  an  intcrjection,  are  in 

the  accusative.     Gr.  §  238,  2 ;  Z.  §  402. Amissis.     Only  one  ship  was 

actually  lost. Unins,  refers  to  Juno.     Sce  notc  on  41,  and  compare  the 

quantities  of  unius  in  that  verse  and  this. 252.  Prodimnr.     This  word 

casts  reproach,  by  implication,  upon  Jupiter  himself,  and  is  justified  by  thc 
heavy  grievanccs  of  which  she  complains.  "  We  are  betrayed ;  we  are  lcft 
unprotected  (by  thee)  from  thc  cruel  machinations  of  Juno,  though  wc  are 

but  obeyingyour  will  and  that  of  fate." 253.  Sic — reponis?  dost  thou  thm 

restore  us  to  jyoicer?     Is  it  thus  that  tliou  fulfiilest  tliy  proniise  of  rc-cstab- 

lishing  our  Trojan  cmpirc  in  Italy  ? Sccpfra,  the  symbol  of  power,  instead 

of  imperium.  Gr.  §  324,  2.  In  prose  the  scntenco  would  be :  sic  nos  in 
iynpcrium  restilvis?     Jicpono  is  followed  by  the  accusative  with  a  preposi- 

tion,  or  by  the  abhitive. 254.  Olli  is  often  uscd  by  the  pocts  for  illi. 

Gr.  §  134,  R.  1  ;  Z.  §  132. Sttbridcns.     Gr.  §  197;  Z.'§  329. 256. 

Dehinc.    Sce  note   on    131. Oscnla  libavit  natac;  hc  kissed  the  lips  of 

his  daughtcr. 257.  Metu;  iov  metui.     See  abovc    ou   156. CjtUcrca. 

Venus  was  so  called  fi-om  the  island  of  Cythcra,  ncar  which  slie  sprung  from 

the  sca. Itnmota ;  in  tlie  prcdicate  ;  remain  unmoved. ^Tibi ;  not  thii 

fatcs,  but  tlie  fates  of  thij  peoplc' rcmain  unmovcd  to  thcc.  For  this  usagc  of 
tlie  dative  of  personal  pronouns,  sec  Gr.  §  228,  notc  (a);  Z.  §  408.     It  is 

tcrmed  the  dativns  ethicus,  and  indicates  personal  intcrest  orsympathy. 

Larini;  for  Lavinii.     See  note  on  Patavi,  247. 259.  Snblimcm.     This 

adjectivc  denotcs  in  its  primitive  signification  citlicr  thc  dircction  or  situa- 

tion  of  the  objcct  witli  wliich  it  agrees :  on  high,  aloft. Fcres  ad  sidcra 

COeli;  in  accordancc  with  the  proraisc  alluded  to  above  (250),  Cocli  annuis 

arccm. ^281.   Illc  refcrs  to  Aencas. Quando;    sincc. Ilaec  cnra; 

etiuivalent  to  cura  de  hoc ;  anxiety  on  his  account.     Madvig,  §  314.    — 

Itcmordet;    continually  worries. 262.  And  unroUing  farther  I  will  dc- 

elare  the  .lecrets  of  the  fates. Volvcns,  is  dcscriptive  of  the  opening  of  a 

$a-oll  or  volume,  in  which  tlie  decrccs  of  fatc  arc  conccived  to  be  written. 

Cic.  Brut.  87,  298;  volvendi  sunl  libri. Dluvcbo.     I  mli  dcclare  or  re- 

licarse.  From  tlie  frequent  signification  of  tliis  verb  to  opcn,  or  cnter  upon, 
[&a,  for  cxample,  to  "start"  some  ncw  theme,)  it  is  occasionally  used  in  the 
sensfe  herc  given  tfl  it.     Comp.  vii,  4(5,  r,n,  y.  Tr,3,  nnd  ITor.  0.  3,  720,  ft/.tf.^Cfas 


BOOK    FIRST.       ^  .  329 

movet. 263.  Italia ;  in  Jtalt/.     See  notc  on  Italiam,  2. 264.  Mores — 

ponet;  he  shall  establish  laios  (mores),  and  a  city  (inoenia)  for  his  feople  {vi' 
ris).  Ponere  is  used  alike  with  mores  (or  ler/es),  and  with  moenia.  More», 
is  here  constitution,  or  civil  organization,  and  laios.  Comp.  vi.  852,  viii.  316. 
Some  understand  by  viris  the  conqiiered  people,  the  Rictuli  and  Etrusci,  or 
ferores  populos,  mentioncd  iu  263.  Biit  wehave  below,  50Y,  dahat  leges  viris, 
said  of  Dido  and  her  own  pcople,  wliere  viris  staiids  precisely  in  the  same 

relation  to  the  queen  as  the  same  word  herc  to  Aeneas. 865,  268.  He 

ehall  be  engagcd  in  this  work  of  establishing  his  powcr  (sliall  reign)  three 
years,  after  having  subdued  Turnus  and  tlie  Rutuhans.  Then  (we  are  to 
understand)  he  shall  be  taken  into  heaven.  According  to  some  traditions 
Aeneas  was  drowned  in  the  Numicius ;  according  to  others  he  was  slain  in 
battle,  and  buried  on  the  banks  of  that  river.  This  period  of  three  years  i3 
expressed  here  by  tertia  aestas  and  terna  hiberna,  meaning  three  summers 

&nd  threiwinters. Regnautem  is  not  '■'■beginninglns  reign,"  but  "continu- 

ing  his  reign."  For  the  distributive  numeral  in  teriia  hibcrna  (tempora), 
see  Gr.  §  120,  4;  Z.  §  119.  Wunderlich  is  followed  by  Thiel  and  others  iu 
making  Rntalis  sabattis  the  dafive  after  transierint,  by  a  Greek  construction. 
But  whether  we  take  it  as  a  dative,  or  as  an  ablative  ahsolute,  which  seems 
preferable,  the  sense  is,  "  after  the  subjection  of  the  RutuHans."  Literally, 
until  the  third  summer  shall  have  seen  him  reigning,  and  three  winters  shall 

have  passed  away,  the  Rutulians  having  been  subdued. 267.  At  often  de- 

uotes  the  transition  to  a  new  idea  or  new  topic,  not  inconsistent  with  the 
foregoing,  but  merely  different  from  it.  But  and  noio  are  so  used  in  Eng- 
H.sh.     Ascanias,  the  son  of  Aeneas  and  Creiisa,  is  accompanying  his  father 

in  his  wanderings. Inlo.     For  the  dative  case  here  see  Gr.  §  204,  R.  8 ; 

Z.  §  421,  note.  The  name  lulus  appears  to  have  been  invented  by  the  Ju- 
lian  family,  or  by  their  eulogists,  as  the  form  from  which  to  derive  Julius, 
and  as  bearing  some  resemblancc  to  the  name  of  the  Trojan  king  Ilus, 
fouuder  of  IHum.  No  authentic  tradition  ascribed  such  a  name  to  Ascanius, 
or,  as  he  was  also  named,  Euryleon.  Julius  Caesar,  in  his  eulogy  upon  his 
deceased  aunt,  Juha  the  wife  of  Marius,  boasted  of  this  high  descent :  Pa- 
ternutn  genus  cum  diis  immortalibus  conjunctum  est — nam  a  Venerc  Julii  cu- 

jus  gentis  familia  esf  nosfra.    Suet.  Jul.  Caes.  1,  7. 268.  Ilns.    Ascanius 

is  fancied  to  have  been  so  called  after  his  ancestor,  the  king  mentioned  iu 

the  last  note. Dum — rcgno ;  while  the  Ilian  state  flourished  in  its  sover- 

eign  p^er.     Ees  is  frequently  state  or  commonweaUh.     Regno  is  an  ahlative 

o/?^^ 269.  Magnos — orbes;  great  circles  of  revolving  months  ;  that 

is,  great  affl||KaZ  circles  or  ycars,  each  of  which  consists  of  revolving  moons 
or  months.    THiie  same  idea  is  cxpressed  in  46.      Volvendis  for  volventihus. 

See  the  same  usag^  of  this  participle,  ix.  7  ;  Gr.  §  274,  R.  9 ;  Z.  §  471. 

Blensibns  is  an  abla^Sj£  of  dcseription  or  quality.  Gr.  §  211,  R.  6.  Rams- 
horn  quotes  the  followm^^^mong  many  examples  of  this  usage  of  the  abla- 
tive :  accepi  tuam  epistol(^^>if^illantibus  lifcrulis.     Cic.   ad  Fam.  16,  15. 


330  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

Others  take  it  less  correctly  as  an  ablativc  absolute. 210,  271.     The 

idea  of  Virgil  seems  to  be  this:  Jii  the  courseofjiis  reifjn  of  thirty  yeara 
he  shall  transfer  the  spat  of  roj^al  powcr  from  Laviiiium  to  Alba.  Other 
accounts  say   that  Ascanius   rcmoved   tlie   seat  of  governnient   to   Alba 

in  the  30th  year  of  his  reign. Vi ;    strenglh,  not  only  in  position  and 

fortifications,    but  in  population   and    rcsources. Miiuict,   for   exstrutt. 

Vcry  often   this  vcrb    signifies,   not  to  strengthcn   that  wliicli    has  bcen 

alrcftdy  built,  but  to  huild  stronc/,  or  simply,  to  huild. 272.  Hic  jam ; 

here  thcn;  or  hcre  from  that  tinie. 273.  Hectorea.     An  emphatic  sub- 

stitute  for  Trojana,  as  Ilector  was  the  most  rciiowned  liero  of  Troy. 

Beg;ina  saeerdos — llia.  Change  the  order  slighlly,  and  translate,  a  priest- 
es.t,  daw/htcr  of  a  king,  (and)  of  Trojan  descent.  Ilia,  or  Rhca  Silvia,  was 
the  mother  of  tbe  twin  brothers,  Romulus  and  Rcmue;  she  was  the 
daughter  of  the  Alban  king,  Numitor,  and  is  hence  called  both  regina, 
which  means,  here,  princess,  aud  Uia,  or  Trojan,  because  the  Alban 
royal  family  was  founded  by  the  Trojan  Ascanius.     She  was  a  priestess  of 

Vesta. 274.  Partu  dabit,  for  cdct,  shall  hear.     Partu  is  an  aljlative  of 

manner. 275.  Lnpae  nntricls.     The  infants,  Romulus  and  Rcmus,  were 

nourished  by  a  shc-wolf  until  thcy  were  discovered  by  the  shephcrd  Faustu- 
lus.  In  allusion  to  this  story  Romulus  was  probably  somctiuies  rcprcscnted 
in  statucs  clothed  in  thc  hide  {tegminc)  of  a  wolf ;  or,  at  least,  his  hclmct  was 
adorncd  with  a  portion  of  the  hidc.  In  hke  nianner  an  ancient  statue  of 
Ilercules,  in  the  Berlin  museum,  represcnts  that  hcro  clad  in  thc  skin  of  the 
Ncmean  lion.  Translate :  rejoicinr/  in  the  skin  of  the  nursing  wolf;  that  is, 
a  v.olf  such  as  nursed  him.     He  did  not  actually  wear  thc  hide  of  his  fostcr- 

mo  'ler. Tegmine ;    ablative  after  laetns,  which  is  uscd  poetically  to  sig- 

nify  possessing  or  using,  with  the  accessory  idca  of  pleasurc  or  advantage. 
It  is  analogous  to  thc  ablat.  sSiqt  contcntus,  preditus,  &ndfretus,  as  explained 

by  Ramshorn,  §  142,  3,  and  Madvig,  §  268,   c.  ;   comp.   beloAv,    696. 

276.  Roninlus — gentem ;  Romulus  shall  receive  the  race  (under  his  power) ; 
succccd  to  the  dominion.  Gentcm  is  the  Alban  or  Trojan  nation.  Excipere 
is  propcrly  to  takc,  eithcr  for  a  good  or  an  evil  purposc,  that  which  is  pass- 
ing  along  or  away.  Sce  Dodcrlcin.  Thc  Ascanian  dynasty  of  Alban  kinga 
tcrniinatcs  with  Amuhus  and  Numitor.      Romulus  rcceivcs  the  dominion 

wliich  is  passing  away  wiih  thcm,  and  re-cstablishcs  it  in  Romc. 276,  277. 

Slavortia  moenia.     Thc  walls,  or  city  of  Mars.     Rome  is  so  called  bccanse 

its  foundcr,  Romulus,  is  the  son  of  Mavors,  or  Mars. De ;  comp.  307, 

633. 278.  nis.     Thc  Romans. EgO.     The  exprcssion  of  the  pronoun 

givcs  greater  wcight  to  thc  promise  ;  evcn  I,  who  have  the  powcr  both  to 

promise  and  fulfil. Nec — pono ;  /  assign   neither  boundaries  nor  peri- 

ods  to  their  power.     Metas  rclcrs  lo  the  terrltorial  cxtent,  and  fempora  to 

the  duration  of  tlicir  dominion. 279.  Sine  fine;  uncnding.     Ronie  is  the 

"eternal  city."^ Qnin;  nai/,  even,  what  is  still  morc  worthy  of  rcmark. 

280.  Meln  is  undcrstood  by  sonic  as  rcfcrring  to  Iicr  fear  for  Carthage, 


BOOK    FIRST. 


331 


as  expressed   in    23,   id  metuens;  but  it  is  more  natural  to  refcr  it  to  th« 

fear  which  she  is  ex- 

citing   in   others:  she 

is  wearying  earth  and 

heaven  (that  is,  all  in 

earth      and     heaven) 

with  fear.     She  is  in- 

cessantly  exciting  the 

fears  of  gods  and  mcn 

by      plotting       strife 

among  them,  and  even 

invoking  the  elements, 

in  order  to  gratify  her 

revenge. 281.  Con- 

silia — refcret  ;  &hall 
change  her  purposes 
for  the  better.     Comp. 

xi.  426. Mecnm  fo- 

Teblt ;  shall  cherish 
toith  me  ;  that  is,  equal- 
ly  with  me.  Horace 
(0.  3,  3,)  describes  Ju- 
no  in  the  council  of 
the  gods,  as  expressing 
her  willingness  to  re- 
ceive  Romulus  into 
heaven,  aud  to  give 
over  her  hostility  to- 
■wards  the  descendants 
of  the  Trojans. 
283.  Rernm  dominos; 
lords  of  the  ivovld;  of 
all  things  in  the  world. 

Togatam.       The 

Romnns  wore  the  ioga, 
the  Greeks  the  palli- 
um,  (see  page  43*7,) 
and  most  other  nations 
of  Asia  and  Europe 
the  bracae,  drawers  or 
trousers ;  see  page 
445.  Hence  the  Ro- 
mans  were  called  to- 
gati,  the  Grceks  pal- 


Koman  orator  in  thc  log». 


332  NOTES    ON    TIIE    AENEID. 

liati,  and  thc  barbariaiis  hracaii. 2S3.  Sic  placUnm.     Supply  est  and 

mihi:  thus  it  has  pleased  mc  ;  or,  thus  I  have  decreed.—LnstTls>  Lnstrum 
\9  strictly  a  period  of  fivc  years,  but  oftcn  used  indofinitely.  Translate : 
ycars  or  agcs.     It  is  in  the  ablative  absolutc  with  labsniibus :  while  ages  ait 

passing  awag  ;  in  the  lap«e  of  ages. 281.  Donins  Assarati.     The  Ronians 

are  so  calied  becausc  their  founder,  Aencas,  was  thc  grcat-grandson  of 

As.=;aracus,  the  son  of  Tros. Plithia  was  a  city  of  Thossaly,  and  tlie  lioinc 

of  Achilles. Myccnac  and  ArgOS  werc  cities  of  Argolls,  the  one  ruled  by 

Agamemnon,  and  thc  other  by  Diomed.  It  is  pleasing  to  Venus  to  hcar 
that  the  desccndants  of  the  conquerors  of  Troy  sliall  one  day  be  subjugated 
by  the  dcscendants  of  tlie  vanquished  Trojans.  Greece  and  Maccdon  wcre 
brought  under  the  sway  of  Rome  by  T.  Q.  Flaminiuus,  Acmilius  Paulus,  and 

Mummius  between  B.  C.  200  and  146. 285.  Argls.     Gr.  §  92,  4.     Only 

the  nom.  and  acc.  are  used  in  the  singular,  the  plural  is  entire.  It  is  here 
the  ablative  of  situation.  Comp.  vi.  '766.  Dotninor  governs  the  dative 
only  in  the  later  Latin  writers.         286.  Origine  5  join  with  Trojnnus  as  a 

Hmiting  ablat. ;  Gr.  §  211,  R.  6  ;  a  Trojan  of  illustrious  origin. Cacsar; 

the  rcfercnce  hcre  scems  to  be  to  Augustus,  who  was  also  called  Julius  Cae- 
ear,  in  consequence  of  his  adoption  by  tlie  dictator.  Ncarly  a!I  thc  carlier 
commentators,  howevcr,  undcrstand  this  passagc  to  rcfer  to  Jullus  Cacsar 
thc  dictator.  The  reason  for  rcjecting  that  intcrprctation  is  givcn  below, 
on  289.  Thc  eulogy  of  Augustus  hcrc  accords  with  inany  found  in  Virgil, 
Horace,  and  other  writcrs  of  the  period.     Comp.  vi.  792-798,  viii.  678-688, 

G.  i.  24-42,  iii.  16-39. 287.  Tcrniinet.      Thc  relative  clause  expresses 

the  end  or  purpose  for  wliich  Caesar  shall  be  brought  into  the  world  by 
Destiny  ;  hence  the  subjunctive.     See  Madvig,  §  363  ;  Z.  §  567  ;  Gr.  §  264, 

6. Astris.     In  allusion  to  his  expccted  deification.     His  glory  shall  be 

like  that  of  Ilerculcs,  Achilles,  Quirinus,  and  other  herocs,  who  have  been 
received  iiito  Olympus.  Thus  Horace  says,  0.  3,  3,  11-12,  Quos  inter  (Alci- 
dcn,  Quirinum)  Augustus  hibet  nectar.         289.  Olim ;  of  future  time,  as  in 

20. Coclo;  ablative.     After  accipere  tho  p/a$c  is  cithcr  in  thc  ablativc  or 

iu  thc  acc.  with  a  prcp. Spoliis  Orientls  ouastnmi     This  li^nguagc  cannot 

bc  /cfcrred  naturally  to  Caesar,  who  won  nothing  which  even  the  poeta 
would  call  oricntal  spoils,  unlcss  thosc  of  the  Egyptian  king  rtolcmy,  and 
rjf  Pharnaccs  of  Pontus  could  bc  so  dcnominated.  But  Augustus  at  thc  bat- 
tle  of  Actiuin,  B.  C.  31,  according  to  thc  expressiou  of  Virgil,  viii.  087, 

gained  oriental  spoils. 290.  Secnra;  thou  /rcc  from  alarm. Ilic  qno- 

quc.  Gr.  §279,  3,  (d).  Jle  also ;  Augustus  as  well  as  Acncas.  Augustus 
was  called  Divus  and  Dcus  by  thc  Romans,  and  templcs  were  crected  and 
sacrificcs  inadc  to  him  ia  thc  provinccs,  evcn  bcforc  his  dcath  and  apotheo- 

Bis.     Conip.  E.  i.  6,  G.  i.  42,  iii.  16. 291.  Tnni.     That  is,  in  the  roign  of 

Augustus,  which  was  lookod  upon  as  the  return  of  the  Saturnian  or  goldon 
ugo,  "  whcn  tirst  the  iron  age  should  ccase,  and  thc  age  of  gold  arise."  E. 
iv.  8  ;  comp.  viii.  319. Aspcra  SCCUla,  is  cquivalent  io  ferrca  secula  in  tho 


BOOK    FIRST,  333 

passage  above  quoted ;  the  age  of  strife. 292.  Fidcs;  faitli  between  nian 

and  man ;  Vcsta,  the  goddess  of  the  hearth,  represents  religion  and  domestic 
virtuc.     Romulus  reconcilcd  icith  Jieimis,  indicates  the  restoration  of  concord 

among  the  political  orders  of  the  state. 293.  Jnra  dabnnt ;  shall  rnle. 

For  the  plural  of  the  verb,  see  Gr.  §  209,  R.  12,  6.  The  sense  of  the  whole 
passage  is :  Social  faith,  domestic  j)urity,  and  public  harmony  shall  prevail, 
Fides,  conceived  of  as  ancient,  or  as  cherished  most  in  the  primitive  tinics, 

is  cana,  hoary. 293-206.     One  of  the  arches  of  Janus,  called  here  tl.e 

gates  of  war,  situated  at  the  foot  of  the  Argiletum  near  the  Roman  Foriun, 
was  always  closed  in  time  of  poace.  This  happened  but  four  times  belbrc 
the  Christian  era ;  first  during  the  rcign  of  Numa,  next  in  the  year  B.  C. 
235,  shortly  after  the  first  Punic  war,  and  twice  in  the  rcign  of  Augustus ; 
namely,  in  B.  C.  29  and  25.  The  image  of  war,  conceived  of  as  a  fury, 
chained  within,  is  of  course  a  poetic  fancy.  Some  suppose  it  refers  to  an 
ancient  painting  of  war  by  Apclles,  placed  in  the  Roman  forum  by  Augustus. 

A  representation  of  the  temple  of  Janus  closed  is  given  on  pag-e  547. 

Fcrro — artis  is  an  instance  of  hendiadys  (sec  on   61)  iov  ferreis  compagihus 

artis:  with  tight  iron  fastenings. Impins  has  reference  to  the  receut  civil 

a.nd  fratei-nal  bloodshed  during  the  contest  between  Caesar  and  Pompey 

and  then  between  Augustus  and  Antony. ^Xodis ;  chains. 29T.  Maia ; 

one  of  the  seven  daughters  of  Atlas,  called  the  Plelades  ;  her  son  by  Jupitcr 
was  Mercury,  the  messenger  of  the  gods.     For  the  case,  see  Gr.  §  246 ;  Z. 

§  451. 298-300.  Patcant,  arcerct.     Both  tlie  present  and  imperfect  sub- 

junctive  are  used  after  the  historical  present;  the  imperfect  perhaps  tho 
more  frequently,  Gr.  §  258,  R.  1,  (a);  Z.  §  501.  Thiel  understands  j;afean< 
to  be  the  "immediate  object"  of  sending  Mercury  down,  and  arccret  the 
"inner  purpose."— — Hospitio  5  the  ablative  of  manner,  equivalent  to  hospi- 

taliter  ;  as  in  iii,  83, Fati  ncscia  j  ignorant  of  fate  ;  i.  e,  ignorant  of  the 

destiny  of  the  Trojans,  which  decrced  that  they  shoidd  settle  in  Italy^  she 
might  suppose  they  intended  to  make  their  abode  in  Africa,  and,  hence,  re- 

pel  thcm  from  her  territories. -Acra  niagnnm ;  the  unbounded  air.     Gr. 

§  86.         301.  Bemigio ;  by  the  rowing  motion,  or  oarage  of  his  wings. 

Oris.    Adstare  takes  either  the  ablat.  or  dative. 302.  Jnssa  facit ;  fulfls 

the  commands ;  the  orders  of  Jupiter;  he  does  this  by  so  influencing  the 
minds  of  the  Carthaginians,  and  their  qucen,  that  when  thc  Trojans  shall 

present  themselves  their  reception  will  be  friendly. 302.  Ponnnt ;  lay 

aside ;  ponere  is  often  used  in  poetry  for  deponere. 303.  VolcutC  dco ; 

became  the  god  wills  it.     Probably  Mercury  is  raeant.; 301.  In  TcncrcSi 

Does  Mercury  exercise  his  power  to  make  Dido  and  her  people  think  of  the 
Trojans,  and  that  with  a  kindly  disposition,  [mens  benigna,')  or  does  he  pre- 
pare  their  minds  without  any  consciousness  on  their  part,  so  that  on  the  ar- 
rival  of  the  Trojans  their  feelings  will  sit  once  be  friendly  ? 

305-417.  On  the  following  morning  Aeneas  wallis  forth,  attcnded  by  Achates  alone,- 
to  explore  tho  ueighboring  country.    In  tlie  forcst  he  is  met  by  Venua  disguised  as  a 


334  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

liuntresB,  to  whom  be  tells  the  story  of  bis  misfortunes.  Shc  dirocts  Liiu  to  continue 
his  walk  until  he  ehall  reach  ihe  ncw  citj'  of  Carthage,  whero  he  will  meet  with  a  kind 
rcception  ;  assuring  him  of  thc  safcty  of  tlio  twelve  missing  ships.  Sho  then  reveala 
hcrself  in  hcr  rcal  form  just  .is  she  is  vaiiiijhing  from  his  sight.  Aeneas  pursues  hia 
■way  protcctcd  hy  the  care  of  liis  mothcr,  who  rendcrs  him  and  his  companion  invisiblo 
by  eurrounding  them  with  "  obscure  air." 

305.  At.     See  on  267. Volvens;  equivalcnt  to  gui  volvcbat ;  trho  was 

meditatbici ;  Wuuderlich  makes  \t  =  qid  volverat ;  who  had  pondercd,  or, 

aftcr  pondering. 306.  l't  primnin  ;  a.s  soon  as.     See  on  210.— .llma  ; 

genial,  This  clause  denotcs  the  time  of  constituit,  not  of  the  injinitives. 
The  iulinitives,  exire,  explorare,  and  referre  dcpend  on  constituit :  hut  pious 
Acneas,  who  tvas  (or  had  heen)  ineditating  much  throughout  the  night,  when 
the  genial  light  first  dawned  resolved  to  goforth,  to  explore  the  new  country  ; 
to  inquire  what  coasts  they  have  come  to  hy  the  force  of  the  wiiids,  who  inhah- 
it  them,  whether  men  or  beasts,  for  he  sees  (only)  a  wilderness,  and  to  report 
to  his  companions  the  things  ascertained.  The  interrogative  clauses,  qws 
accesserit,  and  qui  teneant,  depend  on  quaerere  ;  Gr.  §  265 ;  Z.  §  652 ;  the 
conjunction  connecting  explorare  and  quaerere  being  omitted  by  asyndeton. 

Gr.  §  323,  1,  (1). 308.  Incnlta  refcrs  to  locos  and  oras.     Gr.  §  205,  R.  2, 

(2);  Z.  §  376,  b. Videt  lengthcns  the  last  syllable  here  by  the  ictus.    Gr. 

§  309,  K.  1,(1);  Z.  §  828. 309.  Exacta;  the  things  ascertained. 310. 

Ciassem — ocrnlit.  Convexus,  bcsides  tbe  Eiigli.sh  sigiiification  of  convex,  has 
also  tlic  sense  of  curved  or  circling  inward.  Hcrc  it  is  a  suhstantive,  signify- 
ing  a  deep  recess  [sccessu  longo)  aniong  the  trces,  which,  according  to  the 
description  above,  165,  crown  the  precipices  surrounding  the  bay,  forming 
a  darlt  vault  of  foliage.  The  passage  may  be  rendercd :  He  conceals  the 
Jleet  in  a  deep  recess  of  woods,  under  the  overarching  rock,  mirrounded  hy  trees 

with  their  projecting  shadows. Horrentibns  is  probably  used  hcre  in  its 

primitive  me.aning  as  above,  165,  rough ;  jutting  out,projecting ;  tliough  some 
render  it  by  gloomy.     Nearly  the  same  dcscription  is  found  in  iii.  229,  230, 

where  secessu  longo  is  substitutcd  for  convexo. 313.  Comitatns ;  Gr.  §  162, 

17  ;  Z.  §  632;  it  is  u,sed  here  not  only  as  a.  passive,  but  as  a,  present  partici- 
ple.  The  rcgular  form  would  be  Achate  comitarite ;  comp.  secutae  for  a«- 
qncntcs,  499.  Tiiis  usagc  of  a  perfcct  participle  in  thc  sense  of  a  prcsent 
aro.^ie  from  tiie  want  of  a  prcent  participle  in  thc  pass;ive.     It  is  much  more 

frequcnt  in  poetry  thau  in  prose.     Wagner. 313.  Bina;  as  a  cardinal, 

duo.     Sce  note  on  tcrna,  266.     It  was  coinmou  to  carry  a  pair  of  spears ; 

see   illustration,   page  885.-^— Crlspans ;  grasping ;   not  brandishing. 

311.  Cnl;   limits  obvia;  meeting  whom. 315.  Virginis — Spartanae.     Ve- 

nua  had  appcared  to  Aencas  on  otiier  occasions,  and  cspccially  in  tlic  iast 
night  of  Troy,  fully  reve.aled  as  his  divino  mother ;  she  now  assumes  the 
couiitcnance  and  dicss  of  a  virgin,  and  ai.so  tiie  weapons  of  the  chasc,  such 
a.s  befit  a  Sjiartan  virgin,  or  a  Thracian  hutitrc.^s,  lilie  Ilarpalycc.  Tlie 
xepctilion  of  tcrms,  as  licre  in  virginis,  occurs  occasionaliy  in  all  poetry, 
niid  ifl  not  unpleasing.     Sce  iv.  25,  26.     Tianslatc  :  Ilaving  assumed  the  fact 


BOOK    FIRST.  SSij 

a7id  dress  of  a  vlrgin,  and  a  Spartaii  virgMs  arnis.  Wagner  puts  a  coinma 
after  arma,  thus  bringing  Spartanae  directly  into  contrast  with  Tlireissa ; 
thus  the  sense  would  be,  the  arms  of  a  virgin,  (either)  Spartan  or  such  as 

the  Thracian  Harpaltjce,  &c. Gerens  is  regarded  by  some  as  a  zeugma  ; 

but  this  seems  unnecessary,  as  in  the  sense  of  "  bearing"  the  word  may  ap- 
ply  to  that  which  has  been  assumed,  or  piit  on,  for  the  occasion,  and  hence 
may  with  propriety  be  joined  both  with  os,  habitum,  and  arma.     It  implieg 

"having  assumed,"  and  so  "bearing"  or  "exhibiting." 316.  Vel  qnalis; 

c?-  (of  such)  as  the  Thracian  Harpalyce  (is  who)  tires  the  horses,  &c.  We 
often  have  with  qualis,  as  here,  not  only  an  ellipsis  of  its  antecedent,  talis, 
(see  Gr.  §  206,  16,)  but  also  of  a  verb,  and  sometimes  of  a  connective  ;  here 
all  three  are  omitted ;  namely  talis,  est,  qid ;  comp.  below,  49S ;  iv.  143. 
Harpalyce  was  a  daughter  of  the  Thracian  king  Harpalycus,  and  renowned 
as  a  huntress.  There  were  poetic  traditions,  aud  perhaps  statues,  in  exist- 
ence,  representing  her  engaged  in  the  chase.     Hence  the  presetit   tense 

fatigat,  and  praevertitur. 317.  PraeTertitnr.     This  verb,  in  the  passive 

form,  is  very  rarely,  as  here,  followed  by  the  accusative  in  the  sense  of  otit- 
strip,  go  before ;  the  active  form  is  much  more  frequent;  as  vii.  807,  and 

xii.  345. Hebrum  is  probably  the  true  reading,  though  Eurum,  whieh 

has  been  adopted  in  some  editions,  soems  more  suited  to  the  context.  The 
Hebrus  is  the  modern  Maritza,  which  rises  in  the  Balkan  mountains  and 

runs  into  the  Acgaean. 318.  Hnraeris;  suspendere,  in  v.  489,  is  foUowed 

by  ah;  sometimes  also  by  ex  and  de,  and  also  by  the  dative ;  as,  suspendito 
arbori,  a  phrase  quoted  by  Livy  (I.  1,  c.  26)  from  an  ancient  Roman  law. 

^Demore;  after  the  manner ;  that  is,  of  huntresses. 319.  Diffondere* 

for  diffundendam  ;  literally,  had  given  to  the  icinds  to  diffnse  her  hair.  Gr. 
§  274,  R.  Y,  (b) ;  Z.  §  653.  The  infinitive  in  poetry  is  quite  frequently  used 
to   denote  a  purpose.      Comp.   v.   248,  262,   307;    see  also   note  on   66, 

above. 320.  Genn,  sinns;  as  to  the  knee,  as  to  the  folds ;  with  knee  un- 

covered,  and  with  the  folds  of  her  dress  gathered  up  in  a  knot.  Gr.  §  284, 
ii. ;  Z.  §  458;  Hor.  0.  2,  11,  24;  Phyllis  in  nodum  comas  religata.  The 
statue  of  Diana  with  the  stag,  which  is  now  in  the  gallery  of  the  Louvre, 
and  also  the  one  copied  below  from  the  Vatican,  correspond  in  drapery  to 
this  description.  The  dress  consists  of  two  pieces,  the  tunic  underueath 
and  the  mautle  over  it.  The  tunic  is  shortened  by  being  partially  drawn 
up  underneath  the  girdle,  and-  sufiered  to  fall  over  it  in  a  fold,  forming  a 
sort  of  flounce,  and  thus  bringing  the  bottom  of  the  tunic  a  little  above  tho 
knee.  The  light  and  flowing  mantle,  {peplum,)  which  is  long  and  wide,  ia 
then  folded,  and  knotted  round  the  waist.     It  is  this  gathering  up  of  the 

tunic  and  knotting  of  the  mantle  that  Yirgil  has  in  raind. 321.  Prior. 

Gr.  §  120,  1,  and  §  205,  R.  15. Javenes;  heroes  or  warriors ;  not  quite 

yoiifhs  in  our  sense. 322.  Yidistis.  Gr.  §  259,  note;  Z.  §  517,  note. 

Qnam,  for  aliquam.     For  the  gender  see  Gr.  §  205,  R.  12. 324.  Anl 

connects  ideas  essentially  diff^erent ;  as  here,  ei-rantem,  ivandering  in  scarcli 


336 


NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 


of  the  game,  and  prementumy  actually  fursuing  it ;  vel,  as  above,  31G,  con- 
nccts  exprcssions,  tlie  clioicc  of  which  is  a  mattcr  of  indilTerence.    Gr.  §  198, 

2,  R.  (a);  Z.  §  3;;C. 325.     For  thc  clUpsis  oi  dixit,  see  on  76. OrSBS; 

begaii;      from    ordior. 326. 

Mllii.  For  the  dative  of  the 
agent  after  the  passivc,  sce  Gr. 
§  225,  ii. ;  Z.  §  419  ;  conip.  44(t. 

327.    Quam  —  nieraorem  J 

whom  can  I  call  thee  ?  For  the 
mode,  see  Gr.   §  2G0,  R.  5 ;  Z. 

g  530. 328.    Noc    homlnem 

SOnat ;  nor  does  thy  voice  sound 
human;  literally,  sounds  a  hu- 
vian  beinff.  Sonat  is  here  tran- 
sitive.  Oomp.  vi.  50;  see  Gr. 
§  232,  (2) ;  Z.   §  383,   2d  para- 

graph. Certe.   For  this  usage 

of  the  adverb,  see  note  on  late, 

21. 329.     Art  thou  thvn  the 

sister  of  Fhoebus,  or  one  of  the 

race  of  riymphs? Sangoinis. 

For  the  casc,  see  Gr.  §  212,  R. 

2. 330.  Sis  fclix ;    be  propi- 

■  tious.    For  thc  mode  of  sts,  leves, 
and  doceas,  see  Gr.  §  260,  R.  6, 

(a);  Z.  §  529. 331.  Taudem; 

at  length  ;  join  vi\\\\  jactemur ; 
it   implics   suspense   and   impa- 
Diana.  tiencc.    After  many  wandcring?, 

hc  has  now  rcached  a  place  which  utterly  surpasscs  his  knowlcdgo.    "  AViicro 

in  all  the  world  have  we  anivcd  now?"     Forbigcr. 332.  Jactemnr;  ve 

are  driven  about ;  cast  to  and  fro  by  fortune.     G.  §  265  ;  Z.  §  552. qnc 

at  the  cnd  of  332,  loses  its  final  vowel  in  scanning.     Gr.  §  307,  3. 334. 

Mnlt.i  hostia ;  many  a  victim.     See  Z.  109,  note. 335.  Eqnidem  is  alway3 

u.«ed  by  Mrgil,  Ciccro,  and  Ilorace,  as  a  compound  of  ego  and  quidem  ;  I 

indeed.     Gr.  §  191,  R.  4;  Z.  §  278. Dlgnor,  as  a  dcponcnt,  signifies,  / 

deem  worthy  of  and  governs  the  accusative  of  thc  dircct  object  {me),  and 
the  ablative  of  that  of  wliich  one  is  deemcd  worthy,  {honore.)  The  cothur- 
nus  secn  in  tlic  statues  and  picturcs  of  amazons,  tragodians,  hcrocs,  coin- 
«nandcrs,  &c.,  is  a  boot  rising  ncarly  or  quitc  up  to  tho  calf  of  thc  leg.  It  ia 
'jonictimes  opcn  in  front  froni  thc  instcp  upwards,  andlaccd  with  showy  cords 
orbands;  and  sometimcs  it  was  made,  liliC  a  modorn  boot,  without  any 

opcuing  in  front.    Sce  the  above  figure. 338.  Agenorls;  onc  of  the  carly 

kings  of  Phoenicia.     Carthagc  is  herc  callcd  thc  city  of  Agcnor,  becausc  its 


BOOK    FIRST,  337 

fpunder,  Dido,  is  descendnd  from  him. 339.  Fiacs ;  the  country,  or  terri- 

tory  around  the  city,  in  distinction  from  regna,  realm,  which  is  here   the 

organized  state. Geans,  though  grammatically  in  apposition  with  Jines, 

r^lates  in  sense  to  the  eubstautive  Zibycorum,  Libyans,  i^iiplied  in  Libijci. 
Comp.  iv.  40.     T/ie  country  is  that  of  the  Libyans,  a  race  indomitaUe  in  icar. 

iBtractabile ;  invincible.     Gr.  §  129,4,  (a). 340.  rrbe;  see  note  on 

Italiam,  2.  The  sense  of  the  passage  335-340  appcars  to  be  this:  I  am  no 
goddess,  deserving  of  worship,  but  a  simple  Tyrian  huntress ;  for  we  whom 
jou  wiU  see  here  are  Tyrians,  descendants  of  Agenor,  forming  a  Punic  state 
under  Dido,  a  fugitive  from  lier  brother  Pygmahon.     But  tliough  we  are 

Tyrians,  the  country  itself  {fines)  is  the  warliiie  Libya. 341.  Iiyuria ; 

the  story  of  her  wrongs  would  be  long. 342.  imbages  ;  the  dctails  long. 

For  the  mode  of  est  and  sunt,  see  Gr.  §  259,  R.  4,  (2) ;  Z.  §  520. Snmma 

seqnar  fiistjgia ;  /  will  relate  the  principal  events;  give  ihe  outlitie  of  ihe 
story.-—UZ.  Sychaens  here  has  the  y  long;  below,  348,  the  y  is  short. 

Agri ;  in  land,  hmits  ditissimus,  as  dcnoimg  fulness,  or  abundance.    Gr. 

§  213,  R.  1 ;  Z.  §§  436,  437,  note  2. 344.  Pliocnicnm  limits  the  same 

adjective  as  a  superlative.     Gr.  §  212,  R.  2;  Z.  §  429. Miscrae ;  for  ab 

ea  misera;  by  ihe  unhappy  Bido  ;  dative  of  the  agent,  for  the  ablative  ;  see 
note  on  326 ;  so  Thiel ;  but  others  make  it  the  genitive  after  amore.     The 

dat.  is  preferable;  see  iv.  31. 345.  Patcr  ;  Dido's  father  was  Belus,  men- 

tioned  below,  621. Primis  ominibns ;  in  the  first  marriage  ceremonies. 

This  is  also  implied  in  intactam,  a  virgin. 347.  Ante  alios.     Far  more 

monstrous  ihan  all  others  in  wickedness.     Gr.  §  256,  R.  13,  (b). 348. 

Qaos   refers    to    Sychaeus    and    Pygmalion. Intcr!      The'  prepositions 

ante,  contra,  inter,  and  propter  are  sometimes  placed  after  the  relative 
pronoun,  and  occasionally  after  the  demonstrative  hic.     Gr.  §  2*79,  10,  (f); 

Z.  §  324. 349.  Impins;  especially  because  he  committed  the  murder 

ante  aras;  the  murdered  man  was  a  priest  of  Hercules. 3.50.  Sccuras 

amornm  gcrmanae ;  regardless  of  his  sister^s  love,  i.  e.  her  love  for  Sy- 
chaeus.     For  the  genitive  after  securus,  sce  Gr.  §  213,  R,  1 ;  Z.  §  437,  note 

1. — -351.  Aegram;  dcsponding. 352.  Mnlta  malns  simnlans;   wickedly 

(Gr.  §  205,  R.  15)  inventing  many  things ;  giving  f\ilse  reasons  for  the  dis- 

appearance  of  Sychaeus. Spe  ;  with  the  hope  of  seeing  him  a-ain. 

Amantem;  thefmdwife. 353.  Ipsased;  5m<  (in  spite  of  PygmaUon's  dis- 

simulation)  the  very  ghost,  &c. 354.  Modis  miris  is  hardly  distinguishable 

from  the  singular;  in  a  wonderful  manner ;  wondcrfully ;  it  is  joined  witli 

pallida.     Comp.  x.  822,  vi.  738. 356.  Nndavit ;  laid  bare,  discloscd ;  tho 

ghost  seemed  in  the  dream  to  conduct  her  to  the  altar,  to  show  her  the  in- 
struments  aud  traces  of  his  murder,  and  then  to  lead  her  to  the  place  where 

his  treasures  were  concealod. 35T.  Cclerare,  cxcedere  ;  the  infinitire  in- 

stcad  of  the  regular  construction  after  suadco,  which  is  ut  with  the  subjunc- 

tive.     Gr.  §  273,  2;  Z.  §  616. 358.  Anxiliam  viae  ;  as  an  aid  for  the 

voyage.     Viae  is  an  objective  genitive;    Gr.  §  211,  R.l-    Z    8  403    oj 
15  ,         c     -  .  - 


338  NOTES    ON    TITE    AENEID, 

paragraph.  Madvig,  §  283,  givea  signum  erumpendi,  occaxio  pugnae,  mate- 
ria  jocoriim.  Tlie  apposition,  auxiliit»i,  denotca  the  purpose  of  thesauros  : 
for  lielp ;  that  thei/ iiiai/ serve  to  aid;  uouns  in  apposition  arc  not  unfre- 

qucntly  so  used,  as  laetitiaui,  below,  630. Reclndit,  oquivalent  to  effodit ; 

digs  out  of  tlic  earth  (i.  e.  in  the  dieam  the  ghost  scems  to  do  so.)  Foi 
verbs  couipounded  with  re  governing  the  ablative,  see  above,  on  126,  and 

comp.  679,  ii.  115,  iv.  545,  v.  99,  178,  409,  ix.  32. 361.  Crudele;  deudly  ; 

that  impcls  to  bloody  revengc. 362.  Bletns  acer ;    urgeut  fear;    that 

rouses  to  instant  flight. Qnac  fortc  paratac  ;  t]iat  happcned  to  be  readg ; 

ah-eady  launched  and    prepared  for  diflercnt  destinations. 363.  Aaro. 

Gr.  §  249,  R.  1. 364.  Pygmaliouis  opes;  not  acfually  the  property  of 

Pygmalion,  but  wealth  which  he  had  expected  to  secure  by  murdering  Sy- 

chaeus. 365.    DCTenere.     They  arrivcd  at,   or  reached. LOCOS.     See 

note  on  2,  and  Gr.  §  237,  R.  5,  (a). Nnnc  is  not,  like  Ja/n,  used  of  the 

future  or  the  past,  but  of  the  actual  present.  Ilence  ccrncs,  which  is  fouud 
here  in  many  editioiis,  is  rcjectcd  by  Wagner  for  cernis,  which  is  the  read- 
ing  of  the  best  mauuscripts,  aud  which  Waguer  explaius  by  cernere  licet, 

cernere  jjotes  ;  where  you  noio  can  see. Mercati  (sunt) ;  thcy  bargained  for. 

36T.  Byrsani.     The  citadel  of  Carthage  was  so  called,  according  to  the 

Greeks,  (whose  explanation  Virgil  follows,)  from  fiupira,  a  hidc  ;  because  the 
colonists  cut  a  buirs  hide  iuto  strips  in  order  to  measure  thc  grouud  which 
they  purchased  from  the  natives  for  thc  acropolis  of  their  uew  scttlement. 
The  real  meaniug  of  hijrsa,  howcver,  seems  to  be  citadcl ;  being  a  corrup- 

tion  of  thc  Phoenician  word  hosra. 368.  Possent.    Gr.  g  266,  3  ;  Z.  §  549. 

Veuus  makes  the  statemeut  not  as  her  own,  but  as  the  condition  expresscd 

by  the  parties  themselves  in  thcir  bargaiu. Tergo ;  for  corio,  hide,  as 

V.  405,  and  frequently  elsewhere. 370.  Quaercnti ;  thc  present  participlc 

to  express  au  action  which  had  been  going  ou  aud  was  hardly  comi^Ictcd,  as 

volvens,  305. T.ilibns;   supply  verbis. 3T1.  Imo;   Gr.  §  205,  R.  17; 

Z.  §  685. 373.  Dea ;  Aeucas  feels  that  she  is  something  more  than  a 

simple  huntress,  notwithstandiug  her  disavowal. Pcrgam  and  vacct,  373, 

{were  I  to  go  on  ;  were  thcre  lcisure,)  would  hcre  be  rcgularly  followed  by  the 
Bubjuuctive  present  in  the  apodosis ;  but  the  iudicativc,  componet,  is  substi- 
tuted  for  componat,  in  order  to  cxpress  the  absolute  certainty  of  tlie  couclu- 
sion  iu  tlie  mind  of  the  spcaker.     Scc  Madvig,  §  3-18,  d.,  and  Arnold's  Lat. 

Prose  Conip.  §  50,  a. 373.  Et  yacct ;  and  if  Q/oii)  icere  at  lcisurc. 

374.  Ante;  beforc  I  should  couciudc. Vespcr  ;  ^'cspcr  ;  the  god  of  cven- 

iug.  Ile  is  reprcseuted  by  the  evcuiug  star,  and  his  ollicc  is  to  close  tho 
portals  of  the  sky,  or  Olympiis,  whcn  the  sun  with  his  chariot  has  eutcred 
in;  and  thus,  as  it  wcre,  he  puts  thc  day  to  rcst  {componcrc') :     Vcsper, 

having  closed  Olympus,  will  termitiate  the  day.     Comp.  G.  1,  450. 375. 

Troja — vectOS ;  having  sailcd  from  ancicnt  Troy  ovcr  variom  seas.      Vcctos, 

as  in  121. 376.  Trojae.     Gr.  §  204,  R.  6  ;  Z.  §  425. Ilt.     Gr.  §  259  j 

Z.  §  517  j  ArnoId's  Lat.  Prose,  437. 377.  FortC  saaj  by  its  own  chance; 


BOOK    FIRST.  33S 

aa  opposed  to  the  idea  of  any  foresight  or  plan  of  ourg. Oris ;  dative,  for 

the  usual  prose  construction,  ad  oras.     Comp.  512,  538,  616,  and  iii.  715. 

• 3T8.  Raptos — Teho  ;  tliis  ia  one  principal  proof  of  his  piety. 380. 

.  Italiam  patriam  ;  Itali/  mi/  fatherland ;  because  Dardanus,  my  ancestor,  was 

boru  in  Italy. Et  genas  ab  Jove  ssmmo ;  and  (I  seek)  mi/  ancestry  (which 

\&)from  hir/hest  Jove.     Genus  is  the  accusative.     Dardanus,  the  father  of 

the  Trojans,  was  the  son  of  Jupiter. 381.  Bis  dcnis.     See  note  on  his 

sf/3<e??i,  above,  71. Conscendi ;  I  embarked  on ;  WicvaWx,  I  climbed.     For 

the  term  Phrygian,  see  note  on  182.'        382.  Data  fata ;  the  fates  decreed. 

See    ii.  771-784,  iii.   94-98,    154-171,  and  note  on  205. Secntns,    for 

gequens.     See  note  on  comitatits,  above,  312. 383.  Yix  septem ;  barely 

seven;  even  this  small  number  hardly  saved. Euro,  for  t'«w;o. :385. 

Earopa    pnlsns ;    comp.   233,    clauditur   orbis    terrarum. Querentem  = 

v.t  quereretur ;  not  suffering  him  to  comj:)lain  any  more. 387.  Qaisqais 

es.      Gr.   §  259,  R.  4,  (3). Hand—  COelestibns ;  not  odious  to  the  gods. 

Gr.  §  222,  R.  1 ;  Z.  §  409. 388.  Qni  adveneris ;  since  you  have  come ; 

the  relative  clause  denotes  a  reason.     Sce  Gr.  §  264,  8,  (1);  Z.  §  564. 

389.  Te  perfer;  convey  thyself  proceed.     The  common  form  is  con/er;  but 

per  implies  that  he  is  already  ou  the  road. Limiaa,  for  domum,  the  pal- 

ace  of  Dido.     Gr.  §  324,  3. 390.  Redaces ;  brought  hack  to  land. 

Classem  refers  to  the  twelve  missing  ships. 391.  Tntam,  in  the  neuter 

gender,  is  often  a  substantive ;  safety,  a  place  of  safety. A'ersis  aqailoui- 

bus.     TJie  toinds  having  changed.     Aquilonibus,  as  quite  often,  for  the  gen- 

eral  term,  ventis  ;  comp.  v.  2. 392.  Vani ;  false  ;  pretending  to  a  knowl- 

edge  they  did  not  possess. Docnere.    For  the  indicative  after  ni,  see 

note  on  iit,  376. 393.  Adspice.     She  calls  his  attention  to  a  flock  of 

twelve  swans,  corresponding  in  number  to  that  of  the  missing  ships,  which 
during  the  conversation  has  been  pursued  by  an  eagle,  and  is  just  alighting 
safely  on  the  ground.  The  swan  was  sacred  to  Venus.  Perhaps  the  foUow- 
ing  translation  of  this  much  vexed  passage  may  be  of  service :  Behold  fly- 
ing  joyfally  in  a  company,  twice  six  swans,  which  the  hird  of  Jove  (an  eagle) 
was  (even  now)  dispersing  in  the  open  heaven ;  now  (at  this  very  moment) 
you  see  them  {yidcntur  ;  litcrally,  they  are  seen)  in  a  long  line  either  alighting 
on  the  ground  {capere  terras'),  or  looking  down  npon  the  ground  already  occu- 
pied  (by  their  companions).  As  they  on  coming  back  (into  a  flock)  sport 
with  fapping  wings,  and  have  been  wheeling  swiftly  through  the  air  {cinxere 
polum),  and  have  uttered  their  cries,  not  otherwise  (rejoicing)  are  your  ships 
and  the  manly  band  {pubes')  of  your  countrymen  either  occnpying  a  harbor, 
or  entering  (a  harbor)  with  full  sail.  Large  birds  of  this  kind  fly  in  a  long 
line,  and  those  in  advance  are  often  seen  to  alight  first,  while  the  others 
continue  a  little  while  hovering  above,  and  circling  swiftly  round  in  the  air, 
before  they  settle  down  with  their  companions.  The  points  of  resemblance 
between  the  birds  and  the  ships  are  these  :  the  swans  have  beeu  scattered 
by  the  eagle,  the  ships  by  the  tenipest ;  both  swans  and  ships  have  come 


340 


KOTES   ON    THE    AENEID. 


togethcr  (reduces)  again ;  a  part  of  the  swans  are  actually  aligbting,  while 
the  rest  are  on  thc  point  of  ahghting ;  so  some  of  thc  sliips  are  alrcady  fiirl- 
ing  their  sails,  or  actually  discharging  their  crews  qpon  the  shore,  while  the 
rest  are  coming  into  the  harbor  under  fuU  eail ;  the  swans  have  manifcsted 
their  joy  in  their  escape  by  whceling  about  the  air  in  rapid  flights,  by  flap- 
ping  thcir  wings,  and  by  loud  cries ;  in  hke  manner  the  crews  of  the  different 
ships,  as  they  come  togcther,  interchange  congratulations,  and  join  in  jovial 
Bongs,  as  thcy  euter  the  harbor,  or  toucli  the  land.  Perhaps,  says  Ladewig, 
Virgil  wrote  the  above  verses  in  the  following  order:  Aspice — cycnos ;  Ui 
rednces  illi — alis  ;  Et  coetu — dedere  ;  Aetheria — aperto  ;  Turbahat — longo  ; 

Aut  capere — videniur  ;  Haud  allter,  etc. Tnornm;  of  thy  countrymcn  ; 

not  a  partitive  genitive,  but  a  Umiting  noun  dcnoting  that  which  gocs  to 

make  up  pubes,  the  manly  band. Tenct  portum ;  holds,  is  in,  a  harbor. 

For  the  sin^riiZar  Mw«6er  after  collective  nouns,  sce  above  on  212. 401. 

Qna ;  where  ;  by  what  route.     Gr.  §  255,  2. 402.  Avertens  ;  supply  se. 

Corap.  104. 403.  Ambrosiae.     The  gods  are  described  by  Homer,  and 

the  other  ancient  poets,  as  employing  per- 
fumed  unguents.  These,  as  well  as  the  food 
of  the  gods,  were  termed  amhrosia.  Ambro- 
sial  camc  at  length  to  be  used  as  an  attributo 
of  any  thing  bcautiful  or  plcasing,  pcrtaiuing 

to  divine  beings. Vertice  ;  from  her  head. 

404.  Vestis  dcfluxlt.     Ilcr  dress  had  been 

girded  up  hke  that  of  a  huntress,  but  now 
suddenly  fell  around  her  person  in  graceful 

folds. Imos.     Gr.    §   205,  K.  17. 405. 

Incessa  patnit ;  was  evidcnt  by  her  gait.  The 
gliding  movement  bf  a  god  is  compared  by 
Homer  (II.  18,  778)  to  that  of  a  dove  skim- 
ming  along  on  motionlcss  wings,  just  abovc 
the  surfacc  of  thc  ground.     Comp,  v.   649. 

Dea.     In   scanning  this  verse   the   final 

vowcl  oi'  dca  is  rctained.     See  Gr.  §  305,  (3); 

Madvig,  §  502,  b. 107.  Crndelis  tn  qnoqne ; 

thou  also  cruel ;  as  well  as  Juno  and  thc  othcr 
unfricndly  powcrs.     For  the  positiou  of  qiio- 

que,  see  Gr.  §  279^  3,  (d);  Z.  g  355. 408. 

Dcxtrae.  Jungere  and  nnsccre  are  followed 
by  the  dative,  by  the  ablative  with  cunu,  or 
by  the  ablativc  without  a  prcposition.  For 
tlie  government  of  tiie  infinitive,  jungcre,  see 

Gr.  §  2C9,  (b);  Z.  §  597. 40;>.  Datnr.     For  the  quantity,  sec  Gr.  §  290, 

(a). Veras-   without  disguisc,  siuccrc.     Comp.  vi.  G89. 110.  .Ilocnla. 

The  walis  of  Carthagc,  of  which  Vonus  has  just  spokcn. 411.  Obscuro — 


Venus. 


BOOK   FIRST.  341 

Sepsit.  Enclosed  theni,  (Aeneas  and  Achates,)  as  they  walked  along,  -icith 
dim  air.     This  fancy  is  not  unfrequent  in  the  ancient  epics  ;  as  Odyss.  xiv. 

S9_43. 412.  And  the  goddess  surroiinded  them  with  the  thick  coveriny  of 

a  cloud ;  a  poetic  repetition  of  the  idea  contained  in  the  foregoing  verse 
The  compound  eirfuaj — fudit  is  separated  by  tniesis.  Gr.  §  323,  4,  (5). 
For  the  construction  of  the  cases  after  circumfundo,  see  Gr.  §  249,  R.  3 ;  Z, 

§  418. 413.  Nen,  for  neve,  or  lest. 414.  Moliri ;  to  occasion. 415. 

Ipsa,  contrasted  with  Aeneas. Paphnm.     There  were  two  cities  called 

by  this  name,  Old  and  New  Paphos,  both  in  the  western  part  of  Cyprus. 
Old  Paphos,  now  Kukla,  or  Konuklia,  was  renowned  for  the  worship  of 

Yenus,  who  was  hence  styled  "  the  Paphian." 416.  Laeta.     No  longer 

tristis  (see  228)  since  the  interview  with  Jupiter. Sabaeo.     This  term 

was  appUed  to  incense,  because  it  was  brought  chiefly  frora  that  part  of  Ara- 

bia  Felix  which  was  inhabited  by  the  Sabaei. 417.  Tliare.     Xo  victims 

were  slain  at  the  shrines  of  Yenus ;  she  was  worshipped  with  incense  and 

flowers. Sertis.     See  illustration,  page  54:1.    The  ancients  were  accus- 

tomed  to  hang  festoons  of  leaves  and  flowers  around  the  temples  from  pillar 
to  pillar,  and  also  about  the  altars.     Lersch. 

418-493.  Aene.as  soon  comes  in  eiglit  of  rising  Carthage,  and  wonders  at  the  energy 
of  the  colonists  who  are  rapidly  constructing  fortifled  walls,  public  and  private  edifices, 
Btreets,  arsenals,  and  docks.  He  enters  the  newly  erected  temple  of  Juno,  and  is  both 
Burprised  and  consoled  on  discovering  there,  painted  on  the  walls  of  the  temple,  the 
principal  incidents  of  the  siege  of  Troy  ;  including  the  battlea  in  which  he  himself  had 
been  conspicuous. 

418.  Interea.     While  she  hastens  to  Paphos,  iii  the  mean  while  Aeneas 

aud  Achates  take  their  way  to  Carthage. Cflriipaere  ;  rapidly  pursucd ; 

literally,   seized.     Comp.  t.  145. Qna.     Comp.   401,   and  note. 419. 

Ploriniiis ;  vei-y  high.  On  the  position  of  the  adjective  after  the  relative, 
see  Arnold's  Lat.  Prose  Comp.  53,  and  Gr.  §  206,  (7),  (b);  comp.  ii.  278,  v. 

728. 420.  Arces.     This  refers  to  the  fortifications  of  the  Byrsa,  or  cita- 

del  of  Carthage. 421.  Molem ;  the  massive  structure  of  the  works. 

Magalia  qsondam;  formerly  huts;  i.  e.  where  Jiuts  formerly  stood.  Gr. 
§  204.  Aeneas  niight  infer  from  the  huts  remaining  in  the  neighborhood, 
that  others  had  once  covcrcd  this  ground  also.  Perhaps,  however,  the 
words  are  thrown  in  by  the  poet,  and  not  to  be  regarded  as  the  thought  of 

Aeneas. 422.  Strata  Tiarnm  ;  for  stratas  via^;  the  paved  strects.     Gr. 

§  212,  R.  3,  note  4;  Z.  §  435.  The  genitive  here  is  partitive  in  form,  but 
not  in  sense.  "Li  the  poets  and  later  writers  the  partitive  idea  often  disap- 
pears,  and  only  the  quality  of  the  thing  is  expressed."  Madvig,  §  284, 
obs.  5.  423.  With  our  punctuation,  ducere,  and  the  following  infinitives, 
depend  on  instant ;  a  construction  which  occurs  again,  ii.  628,  and  x.  118; 
see  Gr.  §  271.  Thus  also  Horace,  0.  2,  18,  20,  urges  summovere ;  and  Cic. 
Verr.  2,  30,  59.  Translate:  the  Tyrians  earnestly  prcss  on  to  build,  dx. 
Pars;  in  apposition  with  Tyrii.     Gr,  §  204,  R.  10;  Z.  §  367  ;  comp.  E.  1, 


342  NOTES   ON   THE   AENEID. 

64-C5. 425.  Optnre ;   to  nelect.    Comp.  iii.  109. CoDcladere  snlco; 

Bupply  eitm,  it :  to  endose  (tbe  placc  cboseu)  with  a  furrow;  i.  c.  a  plowcd 
line  mariiing,  according  to  tlie  Koman  custom,  tlie  liinits  of  tlie  estate,  or, 
as  we  should  say,  "bouoe-lot."  Some  understand  liere  a  trench  for  the 
foundatlon  wall  of  a  building.  Tbc  pronoun  is,  wheu  in  tbc  same  oblique 
case  as  the  forcgoing  noun  to  wbich  it  refcrs,  is  omitted,     Gr.  g  2(i7,  R.  26, 

(d);  Z.  §  766. 42Gi  Jnra  sonictimes  ior  jndicia,  courts,  and  bence  put 

here  by  metonymy  forjiidiccs.  Othcrs  take  it  in  its  proper  nieaning,  and 
translate :  viake  laws  and  choose  magistrates,  &c. ;  considering  leyunt  an  cx- 
ample  of  the  zeugma.  Gr.  §  323,  1,  b.  2;  Z.  §  775.  It  is  not  nccessary  to 
suppo.«e  that  every  thing  mentioned  hcre  is  actually  secn  by  Aeneas.  Tho 
poet  wishes  to  convcy  to  thc  rcader  an  idca  of  the  intcn.«e  activity  of  the 
colonists.  Thcy  are  building  a  city,  with  its  docks,  fortifications,  pubhc 
edifices,  and  privatc  houses,  aud  organizing  a  statc,  all,  as  it  were,  in  a  day. 
Hence  tbe  sentcncc,  ^'wra  legunt,  &c. ;  they  choose  judges,  inagistrafes,  and  a 

reverend  senate   naturally  comes  in  as  a  part  of  the  picture. 427.  Alta ; 

deep. 429.  Rnpibns ;  from  the  qnarrics.     Tbc  African  marbles  are  ccle- 

brated.  Tbeatres  did  not  exist  at  the  period  of  the  foundation  of  Cartbage; 
but  Virgil  seems  here,  as  well  as  iu  the  account  of  the  paintings  below, 
(466-493,)  and  not  unfrcquently  elsewhere,  to  have  had  his  own  timcs  and 

the  customs  of  his  own  nation  in  vicw. Sccnls.     This  is  a  dative  after 

Bome  participle  omitted,  (as  cns,)  instead  of  a  genitive  limiting  dccora.     Gr. 
§  211,  R.  5,  note.     Tbe  dative  stands  with  substantives,  where  also  the 
genitive  could  be  uscd ;  but  the  dative  does  not  limit  the  substantivc. 
Alta ;  iofty ;  this  word  means  extending  vertically,  up  or  doxcn,  according  to 

the  point  of  vicw :  Lofty  ornamcnts  for  the  future  stage. 430.  Qnalis. 

See  on  316.  Gr.  g  206,(16);  the  antccedent  bcing  suppHed,  thc  scntence 
will  be,  talis  lahor  eos  excrcebat,  gnalis  lahor  apes — cxcrcct.  Tbe  English 
idiom  omits  tbe  noun  (labor)  in  tbe  sccond  clausc,  prcferring  to  e.xprcss  it 
inthefirst:  such  /aSor  (cmploycd  tbem)  as  occupics  the  bees  in  the  fresh 

summer,   &c.-— 431-432.  Fctus  adliltos;   the  ncwly  matured  srcarms. ■ 

Liqnentia.     The  first  syllable  is  long  herc.     Comp.  v.  238,  ix.  679. 433. 

Stipant;  store. Nectare.    Gr.  §  82,  c.xc.  1,  (b). 434.  Venientnm  ;  for 

vcnientium, Agmiuc  facto  ;   having  formcd  a  hattalion. 13G.  Forvct 

opns  l    the  work  glows ;    is  hriskly  pursucd. Thymo.     lloncy  produced 

from  tbyme,  sucb  as  tbat  »f  Ilymcttus,  has  a  vcry  strong  odor  of  the  herb, 
and  a  diffcrent  flavor  froui  tbat  wbich  we  arc  accustomed  to  iu  Amcrioa. 
Tbc  latter,  iudeed,  bas  little  or  no  odor.  The  accusatirc,  Thytnum,  would  be 
used  in  prose  after  rcdolcre.  Gr.  §  232,  (2);  Z.  §  383,  2d  paragrapb.  27',i/- 
mo  by  some  is  joined  wilh  fragrantia  as  an  ablative  of  causc,  and  redoloit, 

iii  tbat  casc,  is  used   ~hsolutely ;    emits  odor. 437.  Jam  ;  even  now ;  in 

contrast  wilh  the  fortuue  of  Aencas ;  for  his  proiuiscd  walls  of  Lavinium 

(258)  are  not  yet  bcgun. 43S.  SiispUit ;  looks  vp  to ;  the  oppo.^ito  of 

iespiccrc.     Comp.  abovc,  224. 13'J.  Dlfta.     Sce  on  visu,  111. 440. 


BOOK   FIRST.  343 

Hedios*     Supply  viros.     The  midst  of  the  people.     Gr.  §  205,  R.  7,  (1). 

Miscct.     Supply  se.     Gr.  §  229,  R.  4,  1. Viris.     See  on  dextrae,  408. 

UUi;  for  ab  ullo.  Gr.  §  225,  ii. ;  Z.  §  419,  note.  In  prose  this  usage  of 
the  dative  for  the  doer  occurs  very  rarely,  except  with  the  passive  partici- 

ples. 441.  Lnens,  as  distinguishcd  frora  nemus  and  silva,  is  a  sacred 

grove ;  nemus,  a  wood  dlversified  with  lawns  and  glades ;  silva,  forest,  or 

wood  in  general ;  saltus,  a  wild  place  in  the  midst  of  rnountains. Laeti,':- 

sinins  nmbra  ;  very  ahundant  in  shade.     Many  editions  give  wnbrae. 

442.  Qno  ;  join  with  loco. Primam ;  in  the  beginning,  or  on  their  fiist 

arrival. 443.  Siganm  ;    the  token. 444.    BIOHStrarat ;    had  indicatcd; 

i.  e.  she  liad  foretold  to  them  through  some  vision  or  .oracle,  that  from  the 
ground  where  she  desired  them  to  plant  their  new  city,  they  would  dig  up 

as  a  sign  the  head  of  a  horse. Sic  ;  by  such  a  token  as  this. Forc  ; 

depends  on  monstrarat  understood ;  for  she  had  thus  shoion  that  the  nation 

would  be  renowned  in  war  and  easily  victorious  for  ages. 445.  Facilcm 

yictn  ;  equivalent  to  facile  vincentes  ;  readily  conquering  ;  easily  victorious. 
The  supine  victu  here  is  probably  from  vincere,  taken  in  the  active  sense,  to 
conquer.  The  supines  auditu  and  relatu  are  so  used  in  the  passage  quoted 
by  Ladewig  (Ist  edition)  from  Pliny's  Ep.  v.  6,  3,  The  interpretation  of 
Heyne,  "  easy  to  be  supported,  easy  to  be  nourished,"  from  vivo,  would  be 
indicated  by  the  head  of  an  ox  better  than  by  that  of  a  horse.  Ladewig, 
liowever,  seems  in  his  last  edition  to  have  adopted  Heyne's  interpretation. 
The  coins  of  Carthage,  in  commemoration  of  this  story,  were  stamped  with 

the  image  of  a  horse. 446.   Sidonia.     Virgil  uses  as  synonymous  the 

terms  Sidonian,  Tyrian,  &c.     See  above,  on  12. 447.   Douis — divac ; 

rich  with  offerings  (valuable  treasures  given  by  devotees)  and  with  the  pow- 
erful  mawfestation  (numine)  of  the  goddcss.  Some  take  numine  to  signify  a 
beautiful  statue  of  Juno,  or  Astarte,  which  may  have  been  presented  as  an 

offering  to  the  temple. 448-449.  Aerea.     Gr.  §  128,  i.  1.     The  costly 

material  of  the  door,  bronze,  indicates  the  splendor  of  the  temple.  The 
idea  is  still  more  irapressed  by  its  repetition  in  aere  and  ahenis,  as  well  as 
by  the  position  of  the  terms  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  thc  verse.     Comp. 

gold,  golden,  thus  repeated  in  iv.  138,  139,  and  vii.  278,  279. Cni,  limit- 

ing  surgebant,  is  equivalent  to  cujus,  limiting  gradibus ;  from  whose  steps 

arose  a  threshold  of  bronze. Ncxac   aerc   trabes;    timbers   bound  with 

bronze;  this  describes  the  bronze  door-posts,  which  were  heavy  timbers 
cased  or  covered  over  with  bronze.  The  Greek  terms,  xp"""'"^^'''»^,  gold- 
bound,  and  ^«^'^.oSeToy,  bronze-bound,  or  simply  bronze,  are  analogous  to 
nexae  aere  ;  as,  eV  ^''''^''''SeTojy  aiiKals ;  Antigone,  945. ■  Foribns  ;  in  the 
dative  after  stridehat,  instead  of  a  genitive, /ortf^n,  limiting  cardo ;  and  this 
construction  rendcrs  ahenis  more  emphatic  by  throwing  it  into  thc  prcdi- 
cate.  The  passage  may  be  thus  rcndered  :  from  whose  stcps  arose  a  thrcsh- 
old  of  bronzc,  and  bronze  (door')  posts,  (while)  the  hingcs  creaked  vpnn 
(literally,  to)  the  folding  doors  of  bronzc.     Virgil  had  in  niind  the  splcndid 


344  NOTES    ON    THE   AENEID. 

buildings  crected  in  Rome  in  his  own  tinie ;  one  of  which,  the  1'anthcon,  is 
etill  standing.  Its  bronze  door-way,  which  is  39  fect  high  and  lU  fect  wlde, 
rises  from  a  platform,  or  stylohate,  of  five  steps.  The  folds  {forcs)  of  the 
double  door,  and  the  grating  above  them,  are  also  of  bronze.  Peerlkamp, 
Hcnry,  and  Forbigcr  adopt  the  reading  nixae  for  nexae ;  translating  thus : 
the  bcams  rested  on  bronze  pillars  ;  but  this  would  be  a  very  unusual  materi- 
al  for  pillars  or  columns  in  front  of  Roman  buildings,  and  Virgil  would 
scarcely  think  of  nientioning  such ;  though  Ladcwig  adopts  this  reading  also 

in  his  last  edition. que,  in  448,  is  joincd  to  the  ncxt  verse  in  scaiuiing. 

Gr.  §  307,  3,  (3). 452.  Rebns.     Gr.  §  223,  R.  2;  Z.  §  245,  ii.     But  tho 

ablative  occurs  more  frequently  after  conjidcre.     Z.  §  413. 153.  Lnstrat 

dnm  singnla ;  while  he  surveys  the  ohjects  one  by  one. 454.  Qnae — nrbi 

(miratur) ;  he  wonders  at  the  prosperity  which  the  city  enjoys.     Quae  is  the 

relative,  not  the  intcrrogative.     Gr.  §  266,  3 ;  Z.  §  549. 455.  Arti&cnm 

manns ;  the  skill  of  the  artists. Intcr  SC ;   (comparing  tbcni)  with  cach 

other. Opcrnm  laborcm  ;    the  finish  of  their  tcorks.     Thiel  undcrstands 

these  last  words  to  refer  to  the  building  itself,  i.  e.  the  labor  bcstowed  upon 
the  construction  of  the  tcmplc,  in  contrast  with  the  forcgoing  expression, 
(artif  man.,')  which  refcrs  to  thc  works  of  art  in  the  tcmple.     The  paiutings 

were  in  honor  of  Juno,  who  had  becn  victorious  in  the  Trojan  war. 456. 

Ex  ordine  ;  iti  their  (histonca.\)  order. 458.  Ambobus  ;  to  hoth  partics ; 

Achillcs  was  crucl  to  thc  sons  of  Atreus,  (Agamcninon  and  Mcnelaus,)  in  re- 
fusing  so  long  to  aid  in  the  defence  of  tlic  Grcciau  camp  agaiust  the  Trojans ; 
and  crucl  to  Priam,  because  he  had  slain  so  many  of  his  sons,  and  particu- 

larly  Ilcctor,  the  bravcst  of  thcm. 460.  Laboris ; /WetZ  with  (the  story 

of)  our  misforiune.     Gr.  §  213,  R.  1,(3);  Z.  §  436. 461.  En.Priamns. 

£n  and  ecce  prefer  the  nominative,  though  sometimes  followed  by  the  ac- 

cusative.     Gr.  §  209,  R.  13;  Z.  §  403,  n.  2. 461.  Snnt— landi ;  glory 

(praiseworthy  conduet)  has  even  here  its  own  reirnrd,  i.  e.  cvcn  in  this  remote 
part  of  ihc  world.  Sua  refers  to  laudi.  "  Suus  may  refer  to  another  sub- 
fitantive  in  thc  sentence,  (instcad  of  the  subjcct,)  whcre  it  may  be  cxpressed 

by  his  (Jier,  its,  their)  ovm.'"     Madvig,  §  490,  b. ;  Gr.  §  208,  Y,  (a). Prac- 

mia.     The  reward  in  the  prcsent  case  is  fame  and  human  sympathy,  as  cx- 

pressed  in  the  following  beautiful  linc. 462.  Rcrnm  ;  for  miaforluncs ;  an 

objcctive  gcnitive.     Gr.  §211,  R.  1;  comp.  ii.  413,784. 9Iortj\lia ;  hu- 

man  woes. 4C3.  Ilaec  fama  ;  this  renown.     Thc  knowlcdge  of  our  history 

wliich  the  Carthaginians  show  in  these  picturcs. Tibi.     Comp.  261. 

461.  Pictnra;  paintinr/ ;  in  its  gcncral  sense,  rcfcrring  to  thc  whole  collec- 

tion ;  not  picturc,  tabula. Pascit ;  satisflcs,  Jills. Inani ;  nnrcal. 

465.  Mnlta  gemcns ;  groaning  7nuch.  The  neuter  accnsative  of  adjectivcs, 
both  siiigular  and  plural,  is  sometimcs  uscd  advcrbially  by  thc  pocfs.     Mad- 

vig,  g  302;  Gr.  §  205,  R.  10. 166.  Itl  is  interrogalive,  how,  and  thc  fol- 

lowing  subjiinctivcs  arc  under  Gr.   §   265;    Z.  §552;  Madvig,  §456. 

Pergama  means  propcrly  tlie  citadel  of  Troy,  but  is  somctimcs  j^ut,  as  h«re, 


BOOK    FIRST.  345 

for  the  whole  city. CircnBtt     See  note  on  32.     The  series  of  picturea 

here  mentioned,  which  we  must  imagine  to  be  painted  on  panels  on  the 
walls  of  the  temple,  consists  of,  1.  The  victory  of  the  Trojans  under  Hector ; 
2.  The  victory  of  the  Greeks  under  Achilles ;  3.  The  death  of  Rhcsus ;  4. 
The  death  of  Troilus ;  5.  The  Trojan  raatrons  before  the  statuo.  of  Minerva; 
6.  Priam  as  a  suppliant  before  Achilles ;  7.  The  battle  of  Memnon  ;  and  8. 

The  battle  of  the  Amazous  with  the  Greeks. 467-468t   Hac ;   adverb ; 

here ;  in  this  part ;  i.  e.  on  this  pancl:  Ilere  the  Greeks  ivere  Jlying,  (while) 
the  Trojan  youth  pursued ;  here  (on  the  next  panel)  the  Trojans  (were  flying, 
while)  the  cresfed  Achilles  in  his  chariot  pressed  on.     The  first  of  these 

scenes  is  suggested  by  the  Iliad,  xiv.  14;  the  second  by  II.  xx.  sq. 

Currn  Zumpt  and  Ramsh.  regard  as  an  ablative  of  the  instrument. 469. 

Nec  procnl  hiuc;  and  not  far  from  kence  ;  i.  e.  from  that  part  of  the  seriea 

of  paintings  which  has  been  mentioned  in  the  preceding  verses. Rhesi. 

Hhesus,  a  Thracian  prince,  who  had  come  to  the  aid  of  Priam,  and  oncamped 
on  the  night  of  his  arrival  outside  of  the  city.  It  was  fated  that  Troy 
should  not  fall  unless  the  horses  of  Rhesus  should  come  into  the  possession 
of  the  Greeks  before  they  had  tasted  of  the  pasturage  of  Troy,  and  drunk 
of  the  river  Xanthus.  In  the  II.  x.  433,  Ulysses  and  Diomed  penetrate  into 
the  camp  of  Rhesus  on  this  first  night  of  his  arrival,  slay  the  chief  himself, 
and  twelve  of  his  followers,  and  convey  the  horses  to  the  Grecian  camp. 

Niveis  ycUs  ;    with  their  snowy  coverings.     Gr.  §  211,  R.  6.      In  the 

heroic  age  tents  were  not  used  ;  but  huts  made  of  turf  and  interwoven  twigs. 
The  poet  employs  the  language  of  his  own  day,  and  the  painter  takes  a  simi- 

lar  license. ^TO.  Primo  prodita  SOmno.     Translate  literally  :  betrayed  by 

the  first  sleep,  i.  e.  by  the  sleep  of  the  first  night,  or  during  the  hours  of 
sleep  on  the  first  night  after  his  arrival.  This  is  the  obvious  meaning, 
though  niany  take  ^rmo  somno  in  the  sense  of  the  Jirsf  part,  or  thc  earliest, 
and  so  deepest,  part  of  slumber.  But  the  passage  of  the  Iliad  in  the  lOth 
Book,  which  Virgil  here  had  in  mind,  by  no  means  justifies  the  idea  that 

Rhesus  was  slain  in  the  early  hours  of  the  night,  or  of  sleep. 171.  Vasta- 

bat ;  had  been  devastafing.  Ile  was  not  represcnted  in  the  painting  as  actu- 
ally  engaged  in  slaughter,  but  the  bodies  of  the  slain,  scattered  around  in 
the  picture,  suggest  this  idea,  which  is  made  more  imprevSsive  by  the  imper' 

fect  tense. 472.  Avertit ;  is  leading  away ;   driving  away.     This  is  the 

immediate  subject,  or,  so  to  speak,  the  action  of  the  picture. Castra  re- 

fcrs  to  the  Grecian  camp. 473.  Gustasseat.     The  pluperfect  is  used  here 

aftcr  an  historical  present ;  after  a  real  prcsent,  it  would  not  be  thus  used. 

For  the  raood,  see  Gr.  §  263,  3  ;  Z.  §  576. 474.  P.irte  alia  ;  in  another 

part;  i.  e.  of  the  series  of  pictures.-. Trollns.    The  youngcst  son  of  Priam. 

"  Troilus  is  only  once  namcd  in  the  Iliad  (xxiv.  257) ;  he  was  also  raentioned  in 
the  Cypria ;  but  his  youth,  be.iuty,  and  untimely  end  made  him  an  object  of 

great  interest  with  the   subscquent  poets."     Grote,   1,   p.  390. Armis. 

Ablat.  absol.  with  ar,ns?.{s.     It  refers  only  to  his  sh ie Id  and  IicJmcf. 475. 

15* 


346  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

Atqne,  with  our  puiictuation,  connects  infclix  and  impar. Impar;  in  un- 

tqual  combat. Acbilli ;    datiye  liniits  congressun. 4T6.    Cnrrn.      The 

ablutive  coramonly  follows  haererc ;  sometimes  the  dative. Resnpinas; 

throwii  backivard.  The  war  chariot  was  very  short  and  lovv,  iuid  open  be- 
bind.  Two  warriors  usuiiUy  rode  togcther ;  one  to  fight  and  thc  otlior  to 
drive.     The  chariot  in  this  case  is  cmptij,  becausc  pcrhaps  the  chariotccr  has 

bcen  shiin,  and  Troilus  is  thrown  out. 47T.  Tamcn ;  yct  (thougli  he  haa 

bcen  thrown  out  of  the  chariot.)     For  illustrations  of  ancient  chariots  see 

woodcuts  on  pages  364,  ,593. 478.  Versa  hasta  ;  with  his  invcrtcd  spcar ; 

which  being  lield  in  the  right  hand,  and  thrown  backward  over  his  shoulder, 

inscribes  the  dust  with  its  point  as  he  is  draggcd  aloiig. PnlTis.     The 

last  syllablc  is  long  by  the  arsis.     See  on  v.  308. 4T9.  Interea ;  in  tJie 

mean  while,  iustead  of  in  another  picture  of  the  series.  The  paintings  seera 
like  a  narrative,  and  lience  siiggest  the  narrative  term  interea.  In  the  Iliad, 
vi.  269-312,  the  Trojan  matrous,  by  the  requcst  of  Hector,  bear  a  large 
shawl,  or  peplum,  (see  woodcut,  page  314,)  in  procession  to  the  teraple  of 
Minerva,  in  the  hope  of  propitiating  the  angry  goddcss.     This  is  the  subject 

of  the  picture. Ad  templum.    Gr.  §  225,  iv. Xon  aeqnae  ;  u?ipropi- 

tious;  Mincrva  was  under  the  same  provocation  to  anger  as  Juno ;  namely, 

the  judgment  of  Paris.     See  27. 480.  Criuibns  passis ;  wilh  dishcvelled 

hair ;  literally,  tkeir  hair  being  spread;  passis  from  pando.  The  hair  was 
left  unbound  in  token  of  woe,  according  to  the  practice  of  femaloS  in  ancient 

tiraes.     Comp.  iii.  65. 481.  Tnnsac— pectora  ;  literally,  beaten  as  to  their 

breasts  =  beating  their  breasts.  For  the  accusative,  see  note  on  oculos,  228. 
The  perfect  participlc  is  used  here  in  the  sense  of  the  prcsenf,  as  comitatus, 

312. 482.  Soio  ;  the  ablative  after_;?.cos. Aversa;  tarned  awag  ;  to  he 

taken  Utcrally  ;  not  hostile,  though  it  implics  that.  Tlie  statuc  is  represent- 
ed  in  the  painting  with  the  hcad  avcrted,  and  the  eyes  cast  towards  the 
ground.  Even  rcal  statues  were  made  by  the  aneient  priests  sometimcs  to 
move  thc  head,  and  eycs,  and  probably  thc  arms.  Some  have  bcen  found 
among  the  ruins  of  old  temples  in  Italy,  pierced  with  holcs  in  the  back  of 
the  head  or  ncck,  through  which  thc  voice  of  the  operator  could  pass  to  the 
open  lips  of  the  image  ;  or  a  cord  could  pull  the  macliinery  connectcd  with 

the  eyeballs,  or  with  thc  movable  head  and  arms. 483.   Ter  ciream. 

Yirgil  does  not  follow  herc  the  Homeric  description,  II.  xxiv.  15,  scq.,  whcre 
Achilles  is  said  to  drag  thc  body  tlirice  round  the  tomb  of  Patroclus,  but 
probably  has  adopted  thc  tradition  of  tlic  Riiapsodists,  who,  iu  singing  Ihe 
wars  of  Troy,  added  many  sccncs  and  incidents  of  their  own  invention,  and 
would  bo  very  apt  to  rcpre.^ent  tlie  body  of  llcctor  as  dragged  by  tlie  car 
of  Achilles  thrice  round  thc  walls  of  Troij,  ratlier  than  ro%md  ihc  iomb  of 

Palroclus. 184.  Vendcbat.     This  is  tlie  aclion  really  roprescntcd  in  the 

|)ii.ture ;  Achillcs,  as  in  the  bas-rolief  iu  tlio  capitol,  listoning  to  tlie  cntrea- 
ti('3  of  tlic  aged  Priam,  who  knools  boforo  liini,  and  bogs  the  body  of  IIcc- 
lor;  wliilc  near  by  is  sccn  tho  ohariot  of  Aohillos  with  the  corpse  fastened  to 


BOOK    FIRST. 


347 


it  by  leather  tliongs.  The  scene  is  described  in  the  2-tth  Book  of  the  Iliad, 
468  et  seq.,  where  the  hero  is  represented  as  deeply  nioved  by  the  sorrows 
of  Priam,  and  as  yielding  iip  the  dead  body  in  exchange  for  the  ransom 

offered,  which  was  ten  talents  of  gold. Spolia  refcrs  to  the  arms  of  Hec- 

tor,  lying  near  the  tent  of  Achilles.     Observe  the  emotion  expressed  by  the 

repetition  of  ut  in  this  verse,     Gr.  §  324,  13. 487.  Inernies ',  not  fceble 

or  U7iwarlikc,  but  in  its  literal  signification,  unarnted ;  for  he  canie  to  Achil- 

.es  as  a  suppliant. -488.  Se  qnoqnet     Aeneas,  as  one  of  the  most  distin- 

guished  among  the  Trojan  herocs,  must  also  appear  frequently  iu  these 
paintings ;  but  the  particular  scenes  are  not  here  specified.  We  must  not 
suppose  that  the  poet  has  in  mind  any  one  picture,  but  that  he  conceivcs  of 

Aeneas  as  conspicuous  in  several  of  the  paintings. Principibas ;  with 

Grecian  chiefs;  especially  in  the  contest  with  Tydides,  alluded  to  above,  98. 
Aeneas  is  mentioned  in  BooliS  v.,  xvi.,  xvii.,  and  xx.  of  the  Iliad.  For  thc 
government  of  principibus  see  note  on  dextrae,  408.     Permiscere  governs 

the  same  cases  as  tnisccre. 489.  Eoas  \  eastern.     Memnon^  the  son  of 

Tithonus  and  Aurora,  and  nephew  of  Priam,  came  with  both  Oriental  and 
Aethiopian  forces  to  the  succor  of  Troy,  and  was  slain  by  Achilles.  He  is 
meutioned  in  the  Odyssey,  but  not  in  the  Iliad.     For  the  quantity  of  the 

first  vowel  in  eoas  see   Gr.   §  283,  exc.  6. 490.  

Amazonidnm.  The  Amazons,  a  race  of  female  war- 
riors,  were  said  to  dwell  near  the  river  Thermodon, 
in  the  northern  part  of  Asia  Minor.  According  to 
the  post-Home}-ic  poets  they  came  to  the  help  of 
Priam  under  their  queen,  Penthesilea,  who  was  kiUed 

in  battle  by  Achilles. Lnnatis — peltis  ;  an  abla- 

tive  of  description,  limiting  agmina  ;  squadrons  loith 
their  ci-escent  shields.      Gr.  §  211,  R.    6;    Madvig, 

§  272. 491.  Pcnthesilea.     Gr.  §  293,  3. 492. 

Exserta3 ;  uncovered.  lunumerable  bas-reliefs  aiid 
many  statues  of  Amazons  have  been  preserved  frora 
antiquity,  none  of  which  justify  the  idea  that  they 
were  supposed  to  cut  off  one  of  the  breasts  in  order 
to  carry  their  arms  with  greater  facility.     Exserta, 

therefore,  must  mean  simply  uncovered. Snbnec- 

tcns  =  gerens  subnexa  ;  wearing  a  girdle  bound. 

493.  Beilatrtx  \  a  warlike  heroine  ;  in  apposition  with 
Penthesilea.  Observe  the  emphasis  given  to  this 
appellative  by  its  position  in  the  verse ;  like  vena- 

trix,  319. Andetqne.     And  {though)  a  virgin,  dares  to  fght  with  men. 

Viris.     Gr.  §  224.     The  above  woodcut,  copied  from  a  statue  in  the 

Vatican,  represeuts  an  Amazon  in  the  Greek  style.  The  half-moon  shield  ia 
?een  at  her  side.  For  the  Amazou  of  Asia  Minor,  or  in  the  Phrygian  cos,- 
tume,  see  page  432. 


Amazou. 


348  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

494-61:2.  Aencas  is  lo8t  in  contemplating  tlic  llian  i^ictures  when  Queen  Didocntera 
the  temple,  attcnded  by  a  numerous  train,  and  procecde  to  givc  audience  to  her  people. 
While  Aencae  and  Achates,  still  invisible,  are  watching  tho  proccedings,  they  be- 
hold  IlioncuB  and  the  othcr  Trojan  chiefs  belonging  to  the  misBiiig  ships,  entering  the 
tcniple  followcd  by  a  tumultuous  crowd  of  the  Carthaginians.  Ilioiieus,  as  the  cldcBt 
of  the  party,  nddreBscs  thc  queen,  and  makes  knowu  their  name,  nation,  and  rccent 
mishap  ;  complaining  of  the  hostile  disposition  of  hcr  sulyects,  vvho  have  attemptcd  to 
opposc  the  landing  of  tho  Trojans.  Ile  mcntions  Aeneas,  and  his  uncertain  fate,  and 
entreats  thc  quecn  to  aid  the  remnant  of  the  Trojans  to  resume  their  voyage  to  Italy. 
Dido  makcs  a  friendly  reply,  and  apologizes  for  the  harsh  conduct  of  her  eubjectB. 
8he  offcrs  to  give  thcm  the  dcsired  aid,  or  to  receive  them  as  citizcns  into  her  new 
Btate.  Whilo  shc  is  expressing  the  vvish  that  Aencas  liimself  ■wcre  prescnt,  and  hcr 
detcrmination  to  scnd  messengers  everywhere  in  eearch  of  him,  the  cloud,  wliich  en- 
veloped  him,  is  suddenly  dispelled,  and  he  thus  appcars  unespectedly  in  the  prescnce 
of  the  queen  and  liis  Trojan  friends. 

49-4t  Duia,  in  accordancc  with  tlie  gencral  usage,  both  in  prose  and 
poetry,  is  joined  here  with  a  present,  though  thc  events  are  past,  and  the 
following  verb,  iticessit,  is  in  a  past  tense.  See  Gr.  §  263,  4,  (2);  Z.  §  506. 
— — Acneae  hraita  videntur  as  a  dative  of  the  agent,  for  ab  Aenea.  Videri 
is  used  herc,  as  abovc  in  326,  in   its  literal  scnsc ;  tvhile  thcse  icondcrful  ob- 

jects  are  loohcd  at  by  Aeneas. 495.  Obtntn  in  nno  ;  in  one  mute  gaze ; 

absorbed  in  gazing.      Ilor.  Ep.  2,  1,  97  :    Suspendlt  picta  vidtian  mentemque 

tahella. 496.  Ad  teniplnm.     Gr.  §  233,  R.  2. 491.  Inccssit ;  advanccd. 

See  on  46. Jnvcnnm ;  of  youthful  followers ;  mcn  and  womcn  in  tlic 

prime  and  vigor  of  lifc,  froin  20  to  45  years  old.  In  fact  the  tcrm  is  un« 
translatable  by  any  one  English  word.     For  thc  inflcction,  sce  Gr.  §  114, 

exc.   1. Stipante ;    as  comitante,  ii.  40 ;    v.  16  ;    A  yreat  company  of 

youlhful  followers  attending  her. 498.   Qnalis — Diana  cxercct   choros  ; 

.^uch  as  Diana   leads   her  dancing   trains.      Talis,    corrclative   to    qualis, 

is  expressed  below,  503. ^Enrotae  Cyntlii.     Diana,  as  the  goddess  of  the 

chase,  and  thcrefore  the  patron  goddess  of  Sparta,  which  was  dcvoted 
to  war  und  tlie  chase,  frcquented  the  banks  of  the  Eurotas,  thc  principal 
rivcr  of  Sparta.  Likc  hcr  brothcr,  Apollo,  she  was  also  believcd  to  rcsort 
ut  tinies,  with  her  nymphs,  to  mount  Cynthu.s,  in  hcr  nativc  island  of  Dolos. 
Comp.  iv.  147.     Thc  comparison  of  Dido  hcrc  to  Diana  is  suggcstod  by  that 

of  Nausicaa  to  Diana  in  the  Odyssey,  vi.  102-110. 499.  Quam  secutac ; 

folloiving  whoin ;  the  perfcet  participle  for  the  prescnt,  as  abovc   in  481. 

500.  llinc  atquc  lilnc;  07i  clthcr  sidc.    Scc  on  102. Orcadcs;  moun- 

tain-nymphs  ;  who  arc  assemblcd  around  thc  goddess  (gloncrantur)  clothcd 
as  huntrcsses ;  as  roprescntcd  in  Donicnichino's  grcat  painting  of  Diana  in 

the  Borghese  palace. lUa — pectns ;  she  hears  the  quiver  upon  her  shouldcr, 

and  as  she  walks,  towers  ahove  all  the  goddesses ;  joys  penctrate  the  si- 
lent  hrcast  of  Latona.     Tliis  whole  passagc  is  parcnthctical.      Latona  dc- 

liglits  in  Ihc  beauty  of  hcr  twin  cliildren,  ApoIIo  and  Diana. 504.  Pcr 

mcdios  ;  as  in  440. lustans  ;  rn-ging  forward  thc  (puhlic)  work-  and  her 

futurr    r(ali/is.     Instarc  is  foUoucd    cillicr  by   (lio   dative   or  accut^ativc. 


BOOK    FIRST.  349 

Comp.  viii.  433. 505.  Foribns  dirae;  in,  or  witJnn,  the  chors  of  the  sanc 

tuary.  The  queen  had  been  advancing  with  her  tfain  towards  (ad)  the 
Banctuary.  She  has  now  ascended  the  flight  of  steps,  crosscd  the  bi-oad 
platform  or  colonnade  in  front  of  the  door,  passed  through  the  bronze  por- 
tal,  and  taken  her  seat  on  a  high  throne,  erected  at  some  point  directly  iu 

the  rcar  of  the  spacious  doorway,  and  between  it  and  the  altar  of  Juno. 

Media  testtidine  tcnipli ;  witJdn  the  vault  of  the  temple  ;  or  in  the  interior  of 
the  vaulted  temple.  Just  as  Cicero  says,  in  testicdine,  meaning,  i7i  a  vaulted 
apartment.  Vid.  Brut.  22.  Virgil  has  iu  view  rather  a  Roman  than  a 
Phoenician  structure.  The  Eonians  niade  extensive  use  of  the  arch  and 
dome.  Media,  as  Wagner  shows,  is  here  very  nearly  equivalent  to  the 
preposition  i»i;  as  a^iy  point  within  an  enclosure  is  medius.     Hence  media 

testudine  =  in  tcstudine,  within  the  donie,  or,  within  the  vaultcd  temple. 

506t  Scpta  arniis  5  surrotmded  by  men  at  arms. SoHo,  for  i7i  solic);  on  a 

throne. 507.  Jura  dabat  lcgcsqne  Tiris;    she   was   administering  justice 

and  giving  laws  to  her  people.      Jura  are  rights,  decisio?is,  tcsages ;    leges 

are  forms  of  law,  statutes. Opernni  laborosi ;  the  execution  of  {public^j 

works.  She  was  assigning  the  charge  of  these  to  various  overseers,  either 
directly,  according  to  her  own  judgment,  or  else  by  drawing  [trahebat)  lota 
from  an  urn.  The  act  of  draicing  the  lots  is  transferred  here  by  a  poetic 
turn  of  expression  to  the  labor  which  was  to  be  determined  by  lots.  Thus, 
she  was  drawing  the  icork  by  lot  is  said  instead  of  she  loas  drawing  the  lot  to 

decide  the  tvork. 509.    Concarsn  is  the  multitude  of   Carthaginians  ac- 

companying  the  Trojans.     Thiel  makes  concursu  here  an  ablative  of  nianner, 

like  mag7io  co7nitatu ;    Cicero   i7i    Catilinam,  3,  2,  6. 511.   Atcr   qnos. 

In  prose :  quos  ater  aequore  turbo. 512.  Pcnitns — oras  ;  aiid  had  conveyed 

far  away  to  other  shores,  i.  e.  other  than  those  near  Carthage,  and  where 
Aeneas  had  landed.  Some  translate  penitus  here  by  altogcther,  wholly  ;  but 
comp.  iii.  673.     For  the  accusative,  oras,  see  on  locos,  365,  and  note  on  2. 

513.  Obstupnit  is  understood  with  Achates,  and  percnssns  with  ipse. 

For  the  adjective,  see  Gr.  §  205,  exc.  to  R.  2 ;  for  the  verb,  §  209,  K.  12, 

note  9;  also  Z.  §  373,  n.  1,  secoud  paragraph. Siniul — sicinl.     Xot  only 

both  Aeneas   and   Achates  (et — ef),   but  both  instantly  aud  at   the   sa>7ie 

ti77ie. 515.  Res  incognita ;  unco-tai^ity  respecting  the  (as  yet)  unknown 

condition  of  their   friends,  and  the   reception  they  will   now  meet  with. 

See  517-519. Tnrbat;  perplexes. 516.  Dissimnlant ;  they  re/nain  con- 

cea/ed.  Not  wholly  of  their  own  choice,  it  is  true,  for  they  have  no  power 
to  dispel  the  cloud ;  but  they  would  not  wish  to  emerge  at  this  moment,  if 
they  had  the  power ;  and,  hence,  they  connive,  as  it  were,  with  the  diviuity 
which  is  concealing  them.     Dissi7nula7'e  is  to  conceal  that  which  is ;  sit7iu- 

lare,  to  pretend  that  which  is  not.     See  Arnold's  L.  P.  C.  17. 516.  Spccn- 

lantar ;  they  seeh  to  learn,  watch  to  ascertain  what  fortune,  &c.,  hence  fol- 
lowed  here  by  the  dependent  questions,  sit,  linquant,  ve^iiant.  Comp.  note 
on  acccsse7-it,  307. 517.  Fortnna  ;  supply  sif :  vhat  fate  atiends  thc  77ien. 


350  NOTES   ON    THE    AENEID. 

Tlrls.     Sec  Gr.  §  226.     Linquant  and,  518,  veniant,  arc  substitutcd  for 

the  pcrfect  becausc  the  actions  are  conceived  as  scarccly  yct  finishcd. 

Qnld  is  tlic  advorbial  accusative  ;  as  to  what,  why  ? Cnndi,  translatc  in 

thc  predicate,  after  veniant ;  Wliy  thcy  come  all  {togcther).  For  he  had  sup- 
posed  thcm  to  be  separated  from  each  other  by  the  tempest.  Cuncti  is,  all 
taken  tor/ether,  as  opposed  to  dispersi.  Sec  Dodcrlein,  also  Arnold's  L.  P.  C. 
443.     The  reading  cnnctis  agrceing  with  navibu.^i  occurs  in  very  few  of  the 

manuscripts,  though  it  would  seeni  the  niore  natural. Xavibns ;  from  the 

ships.     See  note  on  2. Ibant;  for  venichant ;  for  the  phiperfoct,  tliey 

h ad  co)ne  ;  jnst  so  ve^iiant  {or  the  \)eTfect,  they  have  come. 519.  Orantes 

Teniam  ;  to  sueforfavor;  that  is,  hevo,  for  protection.  See  52G,  aud  comp. 
iii.  114;  the  present  participle  is  used  to  denote  a  purpose,  instead  of  ad 
orandam,  or  ut  (/jui)  orarent.     Gr.  §  274,  R.  2,  (a).     The  construction  oc- 

curs  also  in  prose,  as,  lcgati  missi  axixilium  orantcs.     Liv.  21,  6. 520. 

Introgressi.     Which  is  the  better  form  of  the  auxihary  to  bc  suppHed  here — 

erant?    or  sunt? Coram.     Supply   reyina;    before  the  queen.         Copia 

fandi ;  an  opportunity  of  speaking.     Gr.  §  183,  6. 521.  jHaximns.     Sup- 

ply  natu.  ITie  cldcst ;  hterally,  grcatest  in  respect  to  age.  See  on  654. 
Sonic  prefer  to  take  onaximus  in  a  niore  gencral  sense :  thefrst  among  them 
in  age,  rank,  and  dignity.     How  many  syllablcs  docs  tlie  scanning  of  the 

verse  require  in  Ilioneus? Placido  ;  calm,   though  hke  Neptune,   126, 

graviter  commotus. 522.  Condero.     For  thc  infinitive  depending  on  dare, 

see  note  on  60,  abovc. 523.  Gentes  snperbas ;  proud  nations.     It  refers 

to  the  ncighboring  barbarians,  not  to  the  Carthaginians.  And  if  the  term 
frcnare  seenis  out  of  keeping  with  the  little  colony  of  Carthage,  we  must 
rcmember  the  stately  scene  beforc  IHoneus, — the  queen  upon  her  thronc  in 
a  magnificent  temple,  surrounded  by  guards,  and  by  a  muUitude  of  her  peo- 
ple.  She  is  administeriug  justice  to  them  ;  hence  the  propriety  of  invoking 
her  power  to  rcpcl  thc  insolencc  of  her  subjects,  who  are  attempting  to 

drive  tlie  unhappy  Trojans  from  thc  shorc.  See  540,  541. 524.    Obscrve 

thc  cmphatic  position  of  Iroes. Maria  is  either  govcrned  by  a  prcposi- 

tion,  circum  or  per,  undcrstood,  pr  by  vecti,  takcn  in  an  active  sense  :  hav- 
ing  navigated.,  or  traverscd  all  seas.  The  latter  constructiou  is  prcferrcd 
by  Thiel.      Vehor  often  means  navigo,  and  the  lattcr  sometimes  govcrns  the 

accusativc,  as  above  in  67,  navigat  aequor. 52G.  Generi.    Gr.  g  223,  R.  2. 

Pio ;  righteous ;  obedient  to  the  gods ;  hcncc  dcserving  to  be  spared, 

and  to  be  received  in  a  fiiendly  mannor.     Their  piety  is  most  conspicuous 

in  thoir  chicf,  Acneas. Propins.     Ronder  litcrally,  »/(ore  closely ;  imply- 

ing  that  thcir  rcal  cliaraijtcr  and  circiinistanccs  luive  bccn  misundorstood, 

by  aot  bcing  examincd  carcfuUy  cuougli. 527.  Non,  qualifying  vcuiuius, 

is  rondcrcd  eniphatic  by  its  position. \os.     Why  is  thc  pronoun  c\- 

pressed?     Gr.  g  200,  R.  1,  (b). Llbycos.     Soo  note  on  140. Popnlare; 

llie  infinitivo,  aftor  tlie  Grcck  idioni,  ikMiotos  a  purposc  here,  as  in  oo7. 
Thc  construction  in  prosc  would  bc  nd  pt^pulniuhnn,  or  nioro  r;MoIy,  the  su- 


BOOK    FIRST.  351 

pine,  popidatum.     Gr.  §  21\,  note  3;  and  §  2*76,  R.  4;  Z.  §  668,  2. 

Penates ;  put  by  metonymy  (Gr.  §  324,  2)  for  hearths  or  homes. 528. 

Raptas — verterc.  In  English,  to  seize  and  drive  away.  See  note  above,  on 
69.  Vertere  is  for  avertere  (comp.  viii.  208),  and  refers  especially  to  the 
captives,  and  the  cattle,  which  would  form  the  most  vahiable  part  of  the 

booty. Praedas  is  stronger  than  pjraedam. .529.  Ea  ;  S7ich. AnimO) 

victis ;    supply    est   before   the   datives ;  our  mind  harbors  not   such   vio- 

lence,  nor  have  the  conqucred  such  insolence.     Gr.  §  226. Snperbia  ;  inso- 

lencc,   andacity. 530.     Compare  the   beginning  of  this   description,  in 

point  of  stylc,  with  that  above  in  11;  also,  159;  ii.  21,  v.  12-1,  et  al. 
Hesperiam  ;  which  the  Greeks  call  Hesperia  by  name.  Gr.  §  230;  Z,  §  394. 
The  other  accusative  here  is  quam  understood.  In  the  verse  of  Ennius 
Ann.  1,  36,  from  which  this  is  taken  by  Virgil,  the  quam  is  expressed : 
"  Est  locus,  Hesperiam  quam  mortales  perhibebanf.^''  Hesperia,  from  eVTrepoy, 
vesper,  is  properly  the  western  land.     The  term  was  frequently  applied  by 

the  Greeks  and  Romans  to  Italy  and  sometimes  to  Spain. 531.  Potens; 

excelling. Ubere.     Gr.  §  60,  2  ;  here  for  ubertate,  fcrtilitij,  as  in  vii.  262. 

532.  Oenotri.     These  people  were  said  to  be  kindred  with  the  Pelasgi 

of  Greece,  and  also  with  the  Siculi,  and  to  have  occupicd  Bruttium  and  Lu- 
cania,  in  the  south  of  the  Italian  peninsula.  Italia  was  originally  another 
designation  for  the  same  part  of  the  peninsula,  but  was  gradually  extended 
in  its  application,  until  in  the  time  of  Augustus  it  came  to  signify,  as  in 

modern  geography,  the  whole  country  south  of  the  Alps. Fama ;  predi- 

cate  nominative  after  est  understood ;  of  which  dixisse  is  the  subject.     Gr, 

§  269;  Z.  §  597. Minores;  their  descendants ;  accusative  before  the  in- 

fiuitive  :   That  their  descendants  have  called  the  country  Italy,  from  the  name 

of  a  leader,  (is)  the  report. Gentem  is  put  here  for  terram. 533.  Dncis; 

this  leader  was  Italits,  a  king  of  the  Oenotri„  or,  according  to  Thucydides, 
of  the  Siculi.  534.  Hic  ;  this  was  our  course.  Hic  must  not  be  mistaken 
for  an  advcrb  here.  Huc  is  found  in  some  editions,  but  not  on  good  author- 
ity.  This  verse,  like  many  others  in  the  Aeneid,  was  left  untinished,  though 
the  sense  is  complete,  as  indeed  in  nearly  all  other  instances,  where  such 

verses  occur.     See  iii.   340,  aud  vi.    94. 535.  Assnrgens  flactn ;  rising 

from  the  wave.  See  on  Italiam,  2.  In  the  language  of  the  Romans,  a  star 
is  said  to  set  heliacally  (Jieliace^,  when  it  disappears  in  the  sun's  rays  just 
after  sunset,  and  to  rise  heliacally,  when  it  appears  in  the  east  a  little  before 
sunrise.  When  it  rises  and  sets  exactly  with  the  sun,  which  happens  in  the^ 
interval  of  six  weeks  between  its  heliacal  setting  and  heliacal  rising,  it  is  said 
to  rise  and  set  cosmically  (cosmice).  About  five  months  after  its  heliacal 
rising  the  star  rises  and  sets  opposite  the  suu.  This  is  called  its  acronical 
rising  and  setting.  Besides  these  descriptive  terms,  also  the  expressions 
matutino,  mane,  vcsperi,  vespertinus,  and  cum  sole,  were  sometimes  employed 
in  connection  with  the  words  that  denote  rising  and  setting.  More  fre- 
quently,  liowever,  as  here,  the  reader  is  left  to  infer  which  kind  of  rising  or 


352  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

setting  is  meant.  Iu  the  present  instance  wc  are  to  understand  tbc  heliaca! 
rising  of  Orion,  wbicli  bappeued  in  Virgirs  time  in  tbe  montb  of  June,  and 
wbicb  was  attendod  witb  stormy  wcatbcr.  Ilencc  Orion  was  snpposcd  to 
cxcrt  a  dircct  influcnce  upon  tbc  weatbcr.     Tbe  first  0  in  Orioji  berc  ia 

sbort;  in  iii.  517,  it  is  long. 536.  Pcnitns ;  as  in  512. Austris;  for 

veiitis  ;  as  aquilonibus,  391.  The  ablativc  denotes  tbe  instrumcnt  or  mcans : 
Ilas  driven  us  with  the  raging  winds  far  over  thc  imves  and  dangerous  rocks, 

the  sca  overpowering  us. 538.  Panci ; /ew  in  nnmher ;  tbat  is,  as  com- 

pared  wilh  tbe  wbole  flcet,  a  large  part  of  which  is  missing. Oris ;  sec 

above,  377. 539.  Qnod  genns  lioc  honiiunm  ?  what  tribe  ofmen  is  thls? 

rcferring  to  the  subjects  of  Dido. 540.  Uospitio.     Gr.  §  251  ;  Z.  §  4G8. 

541.  Cient  refcrs  to  tlie  Carthagiuian  guards  on  the  sbore,  not  to  die 

native  Libyans;  Dido  has  commanded  her  people  to  oppose  tbe  landing 

of  strangers  on  tbe  coast. Prima  terra ;    the  very  shore ;  literally,  the 

first  part  of  the  land;  aa  Cic.  Ep.  ad  Fam.  3,  6,  prima  provincia;  the  en- 

trance  of  the  province.     See  Gr.  §  205,  R.  17;  Z.  §  G85. 543.  Sperate ; 

a  softcned  expression  for  metuite.     Comp.  iv.  419,  E.  viii.  2G.     With  Dcos 

supply  fore. 541.  Qno  jnstior ;  tbe  punetuation  is  that  of  Heyue,  wlio 

rcuders  the  passage  thus :  tlian  whom  neithcr  has  anij  other  bce7i  more  right- 
cous,  nor  greatcr  in  pietg,  or  in  war  and  in  arjns.  Tlic  common  punctuation 
omits  the  comma  after  altcr,  and  pietate  is  thus  joincd  witli  justior :  neithcr 
has  thtre  bcen  another  more  righteous  in  pious  duties,  nor  greater  in  war  and 

arms. ^XCC  altcr ;  nor  a  second,  nor  one  other.     Sce  Z.  §  141 ;  Madvig, 

§  496.     Andrews'  Lex.  Alter,  5. 547.  Actberia.     Tlie  poets  sometimcs 

use  aethcr  and  aetherius  for  aer  and  aSrius.     Comp.  bclow,  587,  and  vi.  762, 

vii.  557. 547.  rmbris,  for  inumbris:  nor  yct  lies  in  the  pitiless  shades 

{of  Orcus).  Comp.  v.  371.,  x.  705.  Ileyne  rcgards  it  as  a  dative  cquivalent 
to  morti ;  but  rcst  oftcr  deatb,  seems  to  be  the  idca,  not  cncounfcritig  death, 
or  thc  state  of  (hjing ;  which  would  be  the  sense  oi  occumhere  morti.  54 S. 
Priorcm,  for  prius.  Gr.  §  205,  R.  15,  and  §  120.  Vo?/.  would  havc  no  fcar, 
nor  would  you  repent  of  having  been  ihe  first  to  show  ki^idncss ;  litcrally, 
to  hwe  vicd  in  duty  before  (bim);  quam  illum  (Z.  §  C03,  b.)  is  undcrstood 

549.  Et  =  practerca ;  moreover.     Besides  the  considcration  that  there 

is  a  hope  of  rccovcring  our  chief  and  tbat  be  will  return  your  favors,  we 
have  also  Trojan  friends  and  cities  in  Sicily,  ready  to  receive  us ;  so  that 
you  nccd  r.ot  fear  any  attcmpt  on  our  part  to  settle  here  in  your  country. 
——550.     Soine  autborities  give  arma  for  arva,  meaning  armcd  auxiliaries. 

wbo  are  rcady  to  aid  and  defLud  u.<. 552«  Silvts;  ablative  witb  in  oniittcd. 

Comp.  iii.  220. StrRlgcre  remos;  to  Irini  oars ;  {orfacere  rcmos. .'>.*)3. 

KecoptO  agrccs  with  thc  nearcst  noun,  and  is  undcrstood  wlth  sociis.    Sco  Cr. 

g  205,  cxc.  to  R.  2. Italiam.   Scc  above,  on  2. 554.  tt  pctamns,  bore 

ind  in  558,  is  thc  purposc  oi  .mhduccrc,  aptarc,  and  siringere:  Lct  us  (liccat) 
draiu  up  our  fcct  shattcred  by  th<;  tviiids,  ifc^-.,  in  order  that  ve  niay  JoyfuHi, 
tfrfc  Italy  if  it  ix  grantrd,  d'r. 550.  Inii  J  nn  nbjcctivc  griiitivc;  (»r.  tj 


BOOK   FIRST.  353 

211,  R.  2  ;  Z.  §  423 ;  if  we  can  no  longer  hope  for  lulus    if  thcre  is  no  hope 

of  his  safety.     Forbiger  understands :  hope  in  his  leadership. 55T.  At — 

saitcm  5  yet  at  least  (even  though  Aeneas  be  lost)  that  wc  may  scck  the  waters 

of  Sicily. Frcla ;  ivaters,  as  below,  607. Sedes  paratas.     The  settle- 

inent  already  establishcd  in  Sicily  under  king  Acestcs.     See  above,  on  195. 

558.  rudc  advecti.     Thcy  have  just  left  Sicily.     Sce  above,  34. 559t 

Talibas;  supply  verbis,  as  in  3*70,  and  ait  as  in  76. 561.  Vcitam.     See 

note  on  oculos,  228. Dcmissa;  doioncast ;  not  only  from  natiiral  modesty, 

but  also  on  account  of  the  outrages  charged  upon  her  subjects,  525,  539-541. 

562.  Corde.     Gr,  §  251 ;  Z.  §  468. 563.  Res  dura;  hard  necessiti/ ; 

my  hard  condition  ;  for  she  is  in  constant  danger  of  invasion  from  the  war- 
like  Libyans  (see  339),  or  from  her  hostile  brother  (see  34Y,  et  seq.) 
Talia  moliri;  tomake  such  preparations ;  to  contrive  such  things,  namely, 

as  patrols  (custode). 564.  €nstode,  for  custodibus,  as  milite,  ii.  20,  for 

militibus. 565.  Aeneadum^  for  Aeneadarum.     Soe  Gr.  §43,  genit.  pl. ; 

Z.  §  45,  note  3. Quis  nesciat ;  a  qucstion  of  appeal.     Gr.  §  260,  R.  5 ; 

Z.  §  530 ;  Arnold's  L.  P.  C.  425 ;  who  can  be  ignorant  of ;  surely  no  one 
can  have  failcd  to  hear  of.     IIow  Dido  has  heard  of  the  Trojans  is  explained 

below,  619,  et  seq. Trojae ;  genitive,  instead  of  the  prose  construction, 

Trojam,  in  apposition  with  urbem. 566.  Virtntes  ;  the  prowess. 567. 

Obtasa  ;  blunted,  unfeeling. 568.  Avcrsns  ;  remote.     The  sun  does  not  so 

loithdraw  his  beams  from  us,  our  climatc  is  not  so  frigid  as  to  make  us  cold 
and  devoid  of  sympathy.     The  expression  indicates  the  common  beUef  that 

chmate  aifects  mental  temperament. 569.  Satnrnia  arva  ;  an  appellation 

of  Latium  because  it  had  been  the  retreat  of  Saturn,  when  driven  by  Jupiter 
from  his  throne  in  Olympus.  Comp.  viii.  319;  G.  ii.  173.  The  expression 
Safurnia  arva  has  here  the  same  restrictive  rclation  to  Hesperiam  as,  in  2 

Lavina  litora  to  Italiam. Sen — sire  ;  either  if — or  if;  whethcr — or. 

570.  Erycis ;  a  mountain  in  the  western  part  of  Sicily,  sacred  to  Venns, 

who  is  hence  called  Erycina. 571.  Inxiiio  ;  join  with  tutos  as  an  abla- 

tive  of  means,  rendercd  safe  with  hclp ;  with  all  that  is  needful  for  security 

on  their  voyage. 572.  Vnltis  ct,  for  practerea  si  vidtis.     For  the  ellipsis 

of  si,  see  Z.  §  780,  and  Arnold's  L.  P.  C.  449.  The  omission  occurs  espe- 
cially  in  animated  discourse;  as  Liv.  21,  44,  et  inde  cessero,  in  Africam 
transcendes,  for  si  cessero,  etc.     Et,  as  in  549 ;  moreover,  I  prcsent  this  con- 

sideration :  if,  d:c. Mccnni  paritcr  ;    on  equal  terms  with  me. 573. 

Crbem  qnam,  for  urbs  quam;  literally,  what  city  I  ayn  huUding  (this)  i% 
yours.  Gr.  §  206,  (6),  b;  Madvig,  §  319,  obs. ;  Z.  §  814.  The  order  of 
ihe  words  in  prose  would  be  rcversed:  quam  vrbem.     Comp.  above,  181. 

574.  Mihi.     See  on  tdli,  440. A<;etnr ;  shall  be  governcd,  or  treated. 

The  singular  instead  of  the  plural  is  found  thus  also  in  prose :  cur  Lysias  el 

Hyperides  amatur?     Cic.  Brut.  68. 575.  Koto,  for  vento  ;  as  austris,  536. 

576.  Aflforet.  How  would  the  prcsent  subjunctivc  alter  the  meaning?  Gr. 
§263,  R.;  Z.  §571. -Ccrtos  ;  tmsty. 577.  Lnstrarc  ;  to  explore.     Foi 


354  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

the  mood,  sce  Gr.  §  273,  2,  (d);  Z.  §  617. Extrcma ;  a  partitive;  the 

frontters  of  Lihya.     Gr.  §  212,  R.  3,  n.  4. 578i  Si  is  tlie  interrogative 

here.  Comp.  above,  181.  "As  an  interrogative  (in  depeudcnt  questions) 
6i  is  sometimes  foUowed  by  the  indicative  and  sometimcs  by  tlie  siihjunc- 

tive."     Thicl. Ejectns ,    having   been   cast   awai/. Silvis   and   iirblbns 

should  bc  joincd  witli  errat,  as  ablatives  of  situation.      ITrhlhus  is  talccn  iii 

an  indefinite  scnse  for  inhabited  placcs. 579.  Inimani.    Sce  on  22S. 

581.  Ardcbant ;  had  bec7i  desiring.     The  iniperfect  here  denotes  what  had 

bcen  going  on  and  was  still  continuing.     Gr.  §  145,  ii.  2. Prior,  as  in 

648. 582.  Nate  dea  ;   0  goddess  bom  ;  a  frequent  appellation  of  Aeneas, 

as  the  son  of  Veuus.     For  the  case,  see  Gr.  §  246 ;  Z.  §  451. 584.  rnns 

abest;  one  only  is  missing ;  that  is,  Orontes,  who  was  lost  in  the  storm,  ip- 
sius  ante  oculos,  as  described  in  113-117.  All  the  captains  of  the  twelve 
ships  thercforc  are  present,  or  Achatcs  could  not  know  that  Orontcs  only  is 

missing. 585.  Dictis  niatris.     Sce  890,  391. 587.  Aethera,  for  ailra. 

Comp.  547;  Gr.  §  80,  R. ;  Z.  §  71. 588.  Restitit ;   stood  revealed;   litcr- 

ally,  rcmained;   the  cloud  having  disperscd. 589.   Os  hnmcrosqne ;   in 

rexpect  to  his  face  and  shoulders.     Sec  on  ocvlos,  228. 590,  591.  Lnmcn 

pnrpnrenm ;  the  ruddi/  gloio;  thc  brilliant  complexion  supposed  to  belong 

to  ApoIIo,  and  the  gods. Laetos  honores  ;  sparkling  beauty ;  expressing 

and  causing  joy :   honores  is   for  the  singular,  honorem,  in   the    seuse  of 

decus. Afilarat ;    had  imparted;   breathed  upon  him.     His  mothcr  had 

giten  to  him  for  the  present«occasion  a  supernatural  beauty. 592.  Qnale 

dccns ;  such  beauty  as.  See  on  480.  Tale  decus,  if  expressed  iu  the  ante- 
cedent  clause,  would  be  in  apposition  with  caesariem,  lumeyi,  and  honores. 

Manns ;    supply  artificum;  the  hands  of  artists.     Comp.  455. 593. 

Parins  lapis  ;  Parian  marblc ;  from  the  island  of  Paros,  oue  of  the  Cyclades, 
fitmous  for  the  beauty  of  its  statuary  marble.  Gold,  ivory,  and  silver,  as 
well  as  marblc,  were  extensivcly  employedin  ahcieut  works  of  art,  as  for 
example  in  the  great  statues  of  Phidias ;  and  Aeneas  now  appcared  like 
some  beautiful  statuo  of  such  matcrials.  Such  seems  to  bo  the  comparison 
intendcd ;  wliich  would  lose  its  beauty  and  bccome  pucrile  if  we  were  to 

apply  it  to  the  details  of  form  and  feature. Ant  nbi ;  or  (such  beauty  as 

appears,  quale  dccus  est)  whcn. 594.  Alloqnitnr,  as  in  229. Cnnctis 

limits  the  adjective  i)nprovisus.——595.  Qnacritis  is  addresscd  to  the  assem- 

bly,  and  not  to  Dido  alone. 597.  Jliserata,  a  participlc  instead  of  a  rola- 

tive  clause :  quae  miserata  es ;  litcrally,  0  thou  alone  having  pitied;  for,  who 
ulovx  hast  pitied;  as  passi,  abovc,  199.     Jiliseror  is  to  manifest  pity,  7iiise- 

reoi ,  to  feel  it. 598.  Reliqnias  Dananm  ;  thc  rcmnant  escaped  from   the 

Greeks.     Comp.  30. qne — qnc,   ibr  ct — ef,  both — and.     Soe  on  18. 

599.  Onininm.     Gr.  §  218,  R.   1,  (3).     '' Jigenns,    -idigus,  atid  steri/is  aie 

usually  fuund  ouly  with  the  gcnitivc."     Madv.  290,  obs.  1. 600.  l'rbc, 

domo ;  not  thc  ablalivc  of  situation,  but  under  Gr.  ^  2.'3t»,  tlic  ulilat.  denot- 
,ng  that  in  respcct  to  which  thcy  are  niadc  associatcs. Sofias,  for  vis  so^ 


BOOK   FIRST.  ^    355 

ciare  ;  who  art  willing  to  associate  us. 601.  Non  opls  CSt  nostraCj  for  non 

possumns  ;  we  have  not  the  ability ;  literally  it  is  not  (a  matler)  of  our  ahili- 
ty.     Gr.  §  211,  R.  8,  (3);  Z.  §  448.     Ncc  quicqnid,  noi'  (is  it  in  the  power 

of  the  Trojan  race)  whatever  of  the  Trojan  race  exists  anywhcre. 603.  Si 

qna.     Gr.  §  138;  Z.  §  187.     8i  is  often  used  in  praycrs  and  imprccations. 

Comp.  ii.  536. Pios.     Dido  \s  pious  in  fulfilling  tlie  duty  of  kindncss  and 

hospitality  towards  strangers ;  for  piety,  in  thc  Latin  seuse,  eniliraccs  not 
only  religious  duties,  but  also  those  wbich  grow  out  of  the  relations  of  mun 

to  man. Jastitia  and  mens  consjla  rccti  in  the  foUowing  verse,  refer  to 

the  scrupulous  performance  of  a-.ich  duties  on  the  part  of  Dido.     For  sibi 

and  recti,  see  Gr.  §  222,  R.  3. 694,  60.5.  Si  qnid — recti ;  if  rightcousnes» 

and  a  mind  conscious  to  (in)  itself  of  intcgrity  are  any  thivg  (are  duly  estimat- 
ed)  anytchere ;  that  is,  if  the  conscicntious  fulfilment  of  duty,  such  as  is 
illustrated  in  this  act  of  Dido,  is  properly  apprcciated  by  any  divinities  in 
the  universe.  The  reading,  siquid  justitiae  est  usquam,  if  there  is  any  jus- 
tice  anyivhere,  would  not  refer  to  Dido,  but  io  the  righteousness  of  the  gods. 

606.  Tanti ;  so  illustrious. 607.  Ffeta  occurs  frequently  in  poetry 

for  maria.     Comp.  557. Montibns,   for  mo7itium  ;   sce  note  on  cui^  448. 

608.  Convexa;  the  sides.    Translate,  WteVe  thcshadows  shall  traverse 

the  sides  of  the  mountains.,  i.  e.  as  long  as  the  sun  shall  pursue  his  diurnal 
course.  The  movement  of  the  sbadows  produced  by  the  mountains  on  their 
own  slopes  or  convexities  is  thus  expressed  by  Hor.  0.  «3,  6,  41 :  sol  ubi 

montium  mutaret  umbras. Polns  ;  the  sky,  as  in  90. Pascet.     The  sky 

or  atmosphere  was  supposed  to  afford  nourishment  to  the  stars,  or  to  keep 
them  burning,  "by  means,"  says  Cicero,  "of  the  vapor  which  the  sun  draws 
up  from  the  heatcd  fields  and  waters;"  de  nat.  deor.,  2,  46,  118  ;  but  ac- 
cording  to  the  Epicureans,  they  wei'e  nourished .  by  the  fiery  particles  of 
aether  contained  in  the  atmosphere.     Hence,  v,  838,  they  are  called  e(Ao- 

real. ^Tnnni,  agrees  with  nomen,  and  must  be  supplied  in  the  proper  forma 

with  honos  and  laudes.     Gr.  §  205,  exc.  to  R.  2 ;  comp.  553. 610.  Qnae 

me  cnnqne  \  whatsoever  lands  summon  me ;  whether  I  accept  your  invitation 
to  dwell  in  Carthage,  or  go  to  other  lands,  or  whatever  may  be  my  destiny, 
your  fame  will  be  immortal.  The  separation  of  a  compound  by  intervening 
words,  which  occurs  occasionally  in  poetry,  is  called  tmesis,     See  Gr.  §  323, 

4,  (5). 611.  Ilionea ;  the  Greek  form  of  the  accusative  in  ea  is  usually 

taken  from  the  lonic  form  ea,  but  here  and  in  iii.  122,  from  the  other  lonic 
forni  Tja.     See  Schneider's  Formenlehre,  p.  295. 613.  Post,  for  ^^os^m. 

613-694.  Dido  having  recovorcd  from  lier  flrst  surprise,  addresses  Acneas  conr- 
teously,  and  immediately  preparea  to  entertain  her  new  guests  wlth  royal  hoapitality. 
Aeneas  sends  Ach.ates  to  the  ships  to  Buinmon  Ascanius,  and  to  bring  suitable  prcsents 
for  the  queen.  Venus  causes  Cupid  to  assumo  the  form  of  Ascanius,  while  she  con- 
veys  the  lattcr  to  Idahum. 

613.  Primo;  affirst ;  not  an  adjeclive  here. 611.  Casn  tanto  ;  at  the 

vDond^erful  fortune  or  history  of  the  ?«««.— —616.  Immanibns  ;  savage  ;  be- 


356  NOTES   ON   THE    AENEI-D. 

caase  inhabited  by  the  sarage  Libyans. Orls.     See  on  oris,  377. 617i 

Dardanio.     The  o  is  rctaincd  hcrc  in  scanning:,  and  the  vcrse  is  spondaic,  aa 

iii.  74;    see  Gr.  §  310,  1 ;  Z.  §  841. G18.  Phrygii ;  Trojan,  as  in  182. 

■CIO.  Tcnernni ;  Teucer ;  a  son  of  Tclamon  lcing  of  Salanris,  and  Ilcsione 
daiightcr  of  Laouicdon,  and  sistcr  of  Priam,  was  banished  bv  his  fathcr 
from  Sahimis  on  his  rcturn  from  the  Trojan  war,  bccause  he  had  not  liin- 
dcred  or  rcvcnged  the  dcath  of  liis  brothcr  Ajax.  Observing  tlie  oracle  of 
Apollo  he  sought  a  new  country,  and  settled  in  Cyprus,  whicli  was  conquered 
and  bcstowed  upon  him  by  Bchis,  the  king  of  Sidon.     His  name,  Teucer, 

■was  derived  from  his  Trojan  mother. Venirc ;  with  memini  the  prescnt 

infinitive  brings  the  event  more  vividly  to  mind :  /  remember  Teucer^s  com- 

ing,  or  when  Teucer  came.     See  Gr.  §  2G8,  R.  1,  (a) ;  Z.  §  589. 620.  Nova 

regna.     He  called  his  new  city,  in  the  Island  of  Cyprus,  Salamis.     See  Hor. 

0.  1,  7,  21. 622.  Cypram.     Gr.  §  29,  2 ;  Z.  §  39. 623.  Cognitns  (fnit), 

agrees  with  casus,  and  is  understood  (in  the  proper  form)  with  the  other 
nominativcs.     Gr.  §  209,  R.  12,  (3);  §  210,  R.  1 ;  §  205,  exc.  to  R.  2.— 

Blihi.     See  on  ulli,  440. 624.  Pelasgi ;  the  primitive  settlers  of  Grecce 

were  called  Pe^a.s^i ;  here  for  Gracci. 625.  Ipse  liOStis ;  even  ht.  Ihouph 

their  enemy ;  though  he  had  fought  against  the  Trojans  at  Troy. Ten- 

cros  ;  the  Trojans ;  so  called  from  thoir  anccstor  Teuccr  of  Crete. Fcre- 

bat,  for  efferebat ;  extolled. 626.  Ortuni  volebat ;  gave  it  out,  wishcd  it  to 

he  iinderstood  that  he  was  descendcd.  In  this  usage  of  velle  there  is  an  ellipsis 
of  haberi,  or  some  similar  word.     For  the  gender  of  Stirpe,  sce  Gr.  §  64,  3. 

627.  Jnvcnes.     See  on  321. Tectis ;  the  dative  after  succedite.     lu  prose 

thc  accusative  is  also  used  after  this  verb.     Comp.  E.  v.  6  and  19  ;  G.  iii. 

418. 632.  Teniplis,  for  in  tetJiplis.     In  the  Homeric  age  a  thanksgiving 

sacrificc  in  honor  of  guests  and  strangers  was  offcrcd  at  the  famih/  altar, 
not  in  temples.     See  Odyssey,  viii.  59.     Virgil  follows  the  practice  of  hia 

own  timcs. Ilonorem  ;  sacrijice;  as  in  49. 635.   Terga.     Comp.  vii. 

20.     Terga  suuyn ;  bodies  of  sivine.     2'ergu7n  is  often  put  for  the  whole  car- 

case. 636.  Mnnera  and  lactitiam  are  in  apposition  with  the  foregoing 

accusativcs.  Shc  scnds  these  things  as  presents  and  the  enjogmcnt  of  the  daif, 
(mcans  of  enjoying  the  day  ;)  a  hendiadys,  cquivalent  to  gifls  for  a  dai/  of 
enjoi/ment,  ovfcstal  dai/.  Forbigcr  prcfcrs  thc  rcading  dci  to  dii,  and  undcr- 
stands:  thejog  of  Bacchus,  i.  e.  winc.  Our  rcading,  dii,  is  sustaincd  by  the 
majority  of  the  bcst  commcntators,  and  the  word  must  be  rcgarded  as  an 

old  contractcd  form  of  dici.     See  Gr.  §  90,  2 ;  Z.  §  85,  n.  3. At.     See  on 

2(57. 63T.  Intcrior.     Gr.  §  205,  R.  17  ;  Z.  §  085. Splendida  in  con- 

structiou  bclongs  to  thc  subject,  but  in  sense  to  the  predicafe,  insiruitur;  is 
prepared  so  as  to  be  splcndid,  or  is  sumpfuousli/  prcparcd.  This  figure,  by 
which  an  idca  is  anticipated,  or  exprcssed  beforc  its  proper  time  in  the  scn- 
tcnce,  is  called  prolepsis.     Comp.  659,  iii.  236,  and  iv.  22.     The  vcrb  sunt 

or  instruuntur  is  undcrstood  aftcr  vcstes,  and  the  following  nominativcs. 

Ostro  snpcrbo  ;  of  splendid  purplc ;  an  ablative  of  dcscription.     Gr.  §  211, 


BOOK    FIRST.  357 

R.  6. Ycstes ;  tapestries  ;  for  coverings,  as  in  G.  ii.  464 ;  sce  159*7. 640f 

iDKeus  argcntnm  ;  a  great  nmnber  of  silver  vessels.     Conip.  iii.  466. Mf  a- 

sis,  for  in  mcnsis. Caelata  in  acro ;  carved  on  gold.     The  deeds  of  hcr 

Phoenician  ancestors  were  delineated  or  embossed  on  the  massive  vessels  of 

gold  and  silver. 64^.  Dncta  ;  transmitted  ov  derivcd. 043.  Consistcre; 

tohcat  rest. 644.  Praemittit ;  despatches ;  jjrae  here  denotes  eagerness 

to  send  the  news. 645.  Ferat  and  dncit,  cxpressing  the  purpose  oi  prac- 

mittit,  would  require  tct  in  prose.     J^erat  is  for  nuntiet,  report. Ilaec  re- 

fcrs  to  all  thft  incidents  just  narrated  in  regard  to  Aeneas  and  his  friends. 

Ipsnm  relates  to  Ascanius. 646.  Cari.     Carus,  lilce  <piKo<:,  is  bolh 

fubjective  and  objective  ;  that  loves,  or,  that  is  loved.     Here  it  is  used  in  the 

former  sense, /o«c?. In  Ascanio  stat;  is  centrcd  in  Ascanius.     Gr.  §  245, 

ii.  5. 648.  Pallam  ;  an  ample  robe,  covering  the  entire  person,  and  worn 

over  the  tunic.     See  figure  of  Juno,  page  314;  Venus  Genetrix,  page  8.36. 

Signis  anroqne ;  with  fgures  and  gold;  an  instauce  of  hcndiadys  for 

signis  aureis  ;  icith  goldenfgures;  i.  e.  stiffivitli  cmhroideved  fgures  in  gold. 

The  ablafive  is  under  Gr.  §  247,  1. 649.  Circnmtextnm  acantbo  ;  bordered 

uifh  the  yellow  acanthus.  The  lcaves  and  flowers  of  the  acanthus  were  imi- 
tated  in  embroiderv  with  golden  threads;  hence  yellow.  They  were  often 
imitated  in  ornamental  work  upon  embroidered  cloths,  as  well  as  upon  vases, 
drinking  cups,  columns,  &c.     For  acanthus  embroidery,  see  page  860,  et  al. 

650.  Ornatns ;    namely,  pallam  and  velamcn. Mycenis  ;   Mycenae, 

the  ancient  capital  of  Argolis,  put  here  for  Greece. 651.  Pcteret,  in 

the  scanning  of  this  verse,  has  the  last  syllable  long  by  the  ictus.     See  on 

808;    comp.   111,  91. Hymenaeos.     The  marriage  of  Paris  and  Helcn 

took  place  in  the  island  of  Cranae,  or,  according  to  another  tradition,  at 

Salamis. 652.  Mirabile.     The  gift  was  wonderful  for  beauty. Donnm 

refers  both  to  the  roSfi  and  re/^. 653.  Sccptrnm  ;  supply^Mie^/cnv.    The 

sceptre  was  borne  not  only  by  sovereigns,  but  by  other  persons  of  rank  and 

dignity.     See  above,   on  42. 654.  Maxima  ;  eldest.     Gr.   §  205,  R.  12. 

Supply  natu.     Gr.  §  126,  4,  R.  1  ;  comp.  521. Collo  ;  for  the  necl:     Thiel 

makes  it  the  remote  object  of  ferre. 654.   Monile  baccatnm ;    a  pearl 

nccklace. 655.  Dnplicem ;    double,  or  twofold,    in   respect   to   the   two 

materials  of  which  it  was  composed,  gems  and  gold.  Comp.  728.  For 
the  ablative  see  above,  on  648.  But  Forbiger  makes  it  an  ablative  of 
material ;  a  double  diadem  of  gems  and  gold.  The  following  expres- 
sions,  however,  all  seem  to  be  parallel  in  construction :  duplicem  gemmis 
auroquc ;  648,  signis  auroque  rigentem  ;  165,  atnini  horrenti  umhra ;  189, 

altacornibus;  iii. 407,  a?iro  trilicem. 656.  Celerans, for «i  celcrarct;  comp. 

orantes,  519;  translate,  to  execute  thcsc  commands. 658.  Facicm  et  ora; 

in  form  and  features. 659.  Donis  ;  join  with  incendat ;  that  he  rnay  with 

(aidod  by)  the  gifts  infame  the  impassioned  qucen.  Furentem  is  an  instance 
of  pro/epsis.  See  on  splendida,  above,  637.  The  real  sense  is  not,  that  he 
mriy  infame  her  when  alrcady  frantic,  but  that  he  may  so  infuence  her  riind 


358  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

that  she  niay  become  frantic.  Cupid  is  conceired  to  exercise  his  own  power, 
wliile  aided  also  by  the  princely  gifts  of  Aeneas ;  for  these  awaken  kind 

feelings  in  Dido.     Comp.  714. 060.  Ossibns.     Dativc,     Comp.  vii.  35o. 

• C6!.  DoinKm;  hoicse ;    for  race,   or  nation,   as  in  284. Anibignam, 

biling;aes ;  nnrcHable,  treacherous ;  these  terms  express  the  national  preju- 
dice  of  Virgil  and  the  Ronians,  which  had  rendered  the  term  Punica  Jides  a 

synonyme  for  bad  faith. 662.  llrit ;  Ju7io  burns  her ;  supply  eaw».     The 

foarofJuno's  enniity  c//.si!Mr6.?  Aer  (Venus).     She  fears  the  anger  and  wiles 

of  Juno. Gnra  rctnrsat.     The  anxiety  of  Venus  about  Aeneas  had  been 

relieved  by  the  promises  of  Jupiter,  (see  25*7,  et  seq. ;)  but  now  as  the  ban- 
quet  hour  approaches  at  nightfall,  sub  nociem,  she  thinks  of  the  enmity  of 

Juno,  and  of  the  new  perils  of  the  Trojans,  and  her  fear  returns. 663. 

ifTatnr.     Gr.  §  183,  6 ;  Z.  §  220. 664.  Meae— temnis;  ?«?/  strength,  my 

great  poioer,  icho  alone  dost  set  at  naught  the  Typhoian  missiles  of  the  svr 
preme  father.  Gr.  §  204,  R.  3.  Tlie  thunderbolts  of  Jupiter  slew  the  giant 
Typhoeus ;  G.  i.  279;  hcnce  Typhoia.  The  power  of  love  was  a  favorite 
theme  with  ancient,  as  it  is  with  modcrn  artists.  Ancient  painters  some- 
times  represented  Cupid  as  breaking  in  mockery  the  thunderbolts  of  Jupiter. 
Thorwaldsen,  among  the  modern  sculptors,  has  symbolized  the  triumph  of 
Love  over  the  universe,  in  the  four  beautiful  bas-reliefs  of  "  the  four  ele- 
raents."     In  one  of  these  the  god  is  mounted  on  the  back  of  the  eagle  of 

Jupiter,  and  wields  his  thunderbolt. 666.  Tna  nnmina  ;  thy  divine  poio- 

ers  or  infuences. 667.  Frater.     See  618.     Aeneas  is  the  son  of  Vonus 

and  brother  of  Cupid. Et  is  interrogative,  hou',  as    in    466. Oninia. 

Comp.    32. 668.  Jactetnr.    The  last  syllable  is  lengthened  by  the  ictus. 

Odiis.     Comp.   4    and    251,    ob  iram. 669.  Nota,  for  notum.     Gr. 

§  205,  R.  8,  (b).  This  accords  with  the  Greek  idiom ;  see  Kiihner's  Greek 
Gr.  241,  3.  Wunderlich  quotes  as  an  exaniple  in  prose  Phny's  Panegyric, 
c.  54:  An  prona  parvaque  sunt,  quod  nemo  incolumitatem  turpitudine  re- 

pendit  ? Jnnonia.     This  terra  imphes  the  cause  of  her  fear.     Hospitah- 

ties  wliich  are  extendcd  by  the  people  of  Juno,  (above,  15,)  and  which  are 

subject  to  her  influences,  cannot  be  safe  for  the  Trojans. Qno  se  vertant; 

•what  direction  theymay  take. 672.  Tanto — cessabit ;  at  such  an  important 

crisis  she  will  not  be  inactive.     Cardine  is  liere  an  ablativc  of  timo. 673. 

Ante  ;  before.hand. Flamma;  with  b^iming  love. 674,675.  Ne  qno — 

teneatnr  ;  that  she  may  not  be  changcd  by  any  diriiie  infucnce,  but  may  bc  hcld, 

dcc.      Ut  before  teneatur  is  suggo.stcd  by  thc  foregoing  ne. 675.  Mccuni ; 

iii  common  with  me  ;  as  well  as  I.    Comp.  G.  i.  41,  ii.  8. 676.  Qna ;  supply 

via  or  ratione,  as  in  18;  in  what  manncr  ?     The  question  depend.'^  on  accipe 

meniem  :  learn  how  J  think  you  inay  do  this. 677.  fari ;  as  in  646. 

Urbcm.     Gr.  §  225,  iv. 679.  Pciago.     See  above  on  126,  and  rccludit, 

358. 680.  Sopitnm  ;  being  lulled  io  slecp  ;  Iwill  lull  to  .fleep  and  conceal. 

Sce  on  partlciple,  above,  69. Snpcr,  with  the  accusative,  significs  above, 

over,  and  answcrs  both  the  questions  tchere  and  whiiher.     With  the  abhxtive 


BOOK    FIRST.  359 

it  means  concerning.     In  poetry  with  the  ablative  it  also  denotes  situation. 

Z.  §  320  and  Madvig  §  230,  b ;  comp.  vi.  203,  vii.  557. Alta ;  this  term 

is  applied  to  the  island  because  it  rises  high  out  of  the  water. 681.  Ida- 

linm ;  a  mountain,  grove,  and  city  in  the  island  of  Cyprus. 688.  Qna ; 

as  in  18. Dolos  ;  the  stratagein. Medins  ;  as  iu  348. 683.  Th  is 

emphatic,  as  opposed  to  hunc. Faciem  falle  ;  counterfeit  his  form. • 

KOftem  ampUns.     Gr.  §§  236  and  25(3,  R.  6 ;  Z.  §  485 ;  Madvig,  §  305.     \^ 

what  case  is  ampliwi? 684.  Pueri  paer.     The  association  of  ideas  is 

aided  by  the  juxtaposition  of  the  words;  comp.  v.  569,  x.  734.     Sce  Ar- 

nold's  L.  P.  C,  Introduction,  15;  Gr.  §  279,  4;  Z.  §  798. 685.  Gremio ; 

to  her  bosom;  dative,  for  in  gremium. 686.  Laticem  Lyaenm,  the  liqnld 

of  Bacchus,  for  vinum.     Bacchus  is  termed  Lijaeics,  {\vaios,  from  \veii/,  to 

loosen,)  as  setting  the  mind  free  from  care. 688.  Fallas  veneno  ;  that  you 

may  deceive  her  with  the  poison  of  love  ;  that  is,  infect  her  with  passion  while 
she  is  unsuspecting.     Comp.  vii.  350.— — 689.  Carae.     See   note   on   646. 

690.  Gressn  ;  join  with  incedit  as  an  ablative  of  manner,  in  the  gait  of 

lulus,  contrasted  with  his  usual  motion  as  a  winged  god. Incedit.     See 

on  46. Gandens  ;  ho  delights  in  mischief-malving. Inli.     See  267. 

691.  At,  as  in  305. Ascinio  ;  a  dative  limiting  the  whole  proposition,  in- 

stead  of  the  genitive  limiting  membra.  Gr.  §  211,  R.  5.  "  Sometimcs  a 
dative  is  annexed  to  a  whole  sentence — instead  of  annexing  a  definition  to 
a  single  substantive  by  means  of  a  genitive."     Madvig,  §  241,  obs.  3. 

692.  Irrigat ;    she  diffuses. Fotam  gremlo  ;    cherished  in  her  bosom ; 

clasped  in  herarms,  lilce  an  infant. 693.  Idaiiae  ;  another  form  for  Idali- 

um,  681. Amaracns.    Gr.  50. 694.  Floribns  et  nmbra ;  join  with  com- 

plectitur. Adspirans  ;  breathing  {odors)  upon  (him). 

695-756.  Cupid,  having  thus  entered  the  palace  disguised  as  the  child  Ascanius,  ex- 
ercises  his  powSfc-  over  the  mind  of  the  queen,  in  ohedience  to  the  wishes  of  his  mother, 
to  make  her  forget  Sychaeus,  her  deceased  husband,  and  love  Aeneas.  8he  protracts 
the  hanquet  by  making  many  inquiries  of  Aeneas  about  the  Trojan  war,  and  the  he- 
roes  engaged  in  it,  and  finally  begs  him  to  give  an  account  of  the  sack  of  Troy,  and  of 
his  own  subscquent  adventures. 

696.  Tyriis  ;  for  ad  Tyrios.     See  on  urbem,  677. Dnce  laetns  Achate, 

for  libenter  ducem  habens  AcJiaten.     For  the  ablative  after  laetus  see  above, 

on  275. 69T.  Veait.     Prove  the  tense  by  scanning  the  verse.     See  Gr. 

§  284,  exc.  1. Anlaeis  snperbis;  withits  splendid  tapestries;  an  ablative 

of  description,  limiting  spouda,  which  is  an  ablative  of  situation  ;  on  the  gild- 
cd  couch  with  its  splcndid  hangings ;  see  on  164.  Some,  however,  supply 
et;  making  botli  a);lativos  of  situation;  aulaeis  et  sponda.  Tapestrics  richly 
wrought  with  woven  and  embroidered  figures  were  used  as  carpets,  canopies, 
eoverings  for  thrones,  for  couchcs,  &c,    See  illustration  given  below.     Here 

they  are  spread  over  the  couch,  sponda. 698.  Anrea,  pronouuced  here  as 

a  dissyllable,  aurya. Composnit,  locavit.     The  perfcct  definite,  or  perfect 

with  have.     Sce  Gr.  §  145,  iv.     Observe  the  relation  of  the  tense  here  to 


360 


NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 


the  hiniorical  present,  venit ;  wlicn  he  comes  ihe  qucen  has  already  assumea 

her  position  and placed  hcrself  in  ihe  midst. Mcdiani  is  for  in  medio,  as  in 

348.  Tlic  queen  disposes  her  person  witli  digiiity  [componerc)  on  a  separate 
couch  in  the  midst;  that  is,  in  the  place  ofhonor;  having  the  Carthaginian 
princes,  sucli  as  Bitias,  (see  738,)  on  onc  sidc,  and  her  Trojan  gucsts  on  the 


othcr.     Virgil  supposes  the  gucsts  to  rccHne  at  the  banquct,  tliough  tliis 
practice  does  not  seera  to  have  bccn  introduccd  until  long  aftcr  the  heroic 

age. 699.  Jam  conveniunt ;  are  alrcadji  asscmbling ;  i.  c.  whcn  Ascanius, 

or  ratlier  Cupid,  arrivcs. 700.  Discnnibitnr  ;  thcij  recline ;  litcraily,  it  is 


BOOK    FIRST.  3G1 

beinff  reclined. ^StratO  OStl'0  ;  on  tlie  spread purple  ;  for  aulaeis  purpurels. 

Comp.  697.     For  the  case,  see  note  on  super,  above,   680. 701,  T02. 

Canistrls  expediant  j  t/iey  bring  in,  or  present,  in  baskets. Tonsis  villis ; 

witli,  or  oJ\  soft  naps ;  an  ablative  of  description  as  aulaeis,  607. T03. 

Tlie  inner  apartments,  wliere  the  servants  are  preparing  the  food,  are  sepa- 
rated  from  the  airium,  or  assembly  room,  by  corridors  or  narrow  passagcs, 
called/aMce.5.  An  ordinary  dining-room,  or  tricliniion,  would  not,  of  coin>e, 
be  used  on  the  preseiit  occasion.     With  Famolae,  supply  su7it.     Gr.  §  2nii. 

R.  4;  Z.  §  776;  comp.  note  on  157. Qnibas  limits  est  understood,  cf 

which  struere  and  adolere  are  the  suhjects,  cura  being  the  jjredicate  noniiua- 

tive,  whose  care  it  is,  (L'c. Ordiue  lougO  ;  in  a  long  row,  or  in  long  rows  ; 

referring  not  to  the  order  in  which  the  servants  stood,  but  to  the  arrange- 
ment  of  the  dishes  of  food,  or  provisions,  penmn.  To  prevent  confusion  ut 
euch  an  entertainment  all  the  articles  of  food  must  be  properly  set  out  in 
the  inner  room  by  the  servants,  {famulae,)  so  that  the  waiters  {ininistri  and 
ministrae)  might  promptly  perform  their  duty  of  carrying  the  dishes  into 
the  banqueting  hall,  and  changing  the  courses.     Wagner  and  Ladewig  adopt 

the  reading  longam  penum.     Gr.  §  88. TO-l.  Strnere  ;  to  arrange ;  i.  e. 

before  they  are  carried  to  the  guests. Flamniis  adolere ;  to  worship  the 

household  gods  with  incense.  Comp.  E.  viii.  65,  G.  iv.  379.  The  altar  of 
the  penates  is  in  the  penetralia,  intus,  and  the  servauts  stationed  there  are 
required  to  burn  incense  before  them,  as  a  necessary  accompaniment  of  the 
rites  of  hospitality.  In  Overbeck's  Pompeii,  page  200,  there  is  a  reprcsenta- 
tion  of  the  house  altar  and  private  worship  of  the  Penates.  Others  under- 
stand  by  it,  not  keeping  the  altar  fire  burning,  but  preparing  food  with  fire 

on  the  hedrth. T06.  Qui.     Gr.  §  205,  Pt.  2,(1).     The  relative  pronoun 

referring  to  two  or  more  nouns  dcnoting  living  beings,  and  of  difierent  gen 
der,  is  iu  the  masculine.    Madvig,  315. — — Onereut,  ponaut ;  in  the  subjunc- 

tive  with  qui,  to  denote  a  purpose.     Gr,  §  264,  5 ;  Z.  §  567. 70T.  iVec 

BOn  et ;  and  also.  Gr.  §  277,  R.  4;  Z.  §§  334  and  754.  The  usage  of  ncc 
»io?i  in  juxtaposition  to  connect  two  single  ideas  is  peculiar  to  poets  and 

inferior  prose  writers.     Madvig,  §  460,  obs.  1. Per  limina  laeta  ;  over  the 

jot/ous  thresholds ;  i.  e.  through  the  festive  haUs. 708.  Toris  pictis ;  on 

tlie  pictured  couches ;  referring  to  the  embroidered  coverings,  aulaeis,  raen- 

tioned  above,  697. Jnssi ;  according  to  Wagner  this  is  for  et  jussi  sunt: 

and  have  bcen  iWvited.     The  queen  first  takes  her  place  at  the  banquet ;  tlien 

the  Trojan  guests;  and,  lastly,  the  Carthaginians. 711.    Comp.  648,  649. 

712.  Pesti ;  to  bancful  passion.     Comp.  iv.  90. 713.  Jleutcui ;  the 

Greck  accusative.     See  on  228. \eqoit.     Gr.  §  182,  R.  3,  n;    Z.  §  216. 

7U.  Pnero  domsqne.    Comp.  659,  660. T15.  Complexa  CJiioqae; 

•  »t  the  embrace  and  on  the  neck.     Pendeo  is  followed  by  «o,  cx,  or  in,  with 

the  ablative  ;  or  by  the  ablative  alone.     Comp.  ii.  546,  vii.  1S4,  xi.  577. 

717.  Magnnm — amorcm;  has  satisfied  the  great  affection  of  his  pretendcd 
fathcr;  that  is,  rcooivcd  all  the  endearments  that  bis  father  wished   to 
IG 


362  NOTES    ON    THE    AEyEID. 

mauitcst ;  but  soine  takc  thc  scnsc  to  bc  :  vianifestcd  all  the  love  due  to  ki» 
supposed  fathcr ;  that  is,  fulfiUed  or  acted  his  part  well.     In  tbis  case  ^reni- 

toris  would  be  Ihc  ohject  of  amorem. T17,  718.  Haee — hacrot ;  xhe  fastcns 

upon  the  child,  loith  her  ei/es,  and  with  her  wholc  heart. TI8,  719.  luscia 

insidcat  j  not  l-nowing  what  a  powcrful  divinity  rests  tipon  hcr.  For  the 
dative,  sec  Gr.  §  !224;  Z.  §  415.  Tiie  question  insidcat  depends  on  inncia. 
Gr.  §  2G5 ;  Z.  §  552.     Inxidcat  (in  some  editions  in.tidat)  is  exphiined  by 

cjrcmio  fovct. T20t  lcidaliac ;  a  tcnn  applied  to  Venias  from  Acidalius, 

the  name  of  a  fountain  iu  Boootia,  wliich  was  one  of  tlie  haunts  of  Venus 

and  the  Graces. Abolcrc  Sycliaenia  ;  to  taJcc  away  (from  her)  the  memory 

of  Sychaeus.     See  343. 721.  Pr.iCTerterc  ;  to  prepossess  ;  that  is,  before 

her  thoughts  again  recur  to  tlie  past  and  to  Sychaeus.  The  god  causes  her 
to  forget  her  first  love,  and  rcawakens  her  dormant  passions,  {resides  ani- 
mos,)  whieli  lie  directs  towards  a  living  object,  before  her  niind  shall  fail 

back  into  habitual  tliouglits  of  Sycliaeus. ^723.  Qnies:   subject  oi  fuit 

understood ;  literally,  when  the  Jirst  rest  was  to  the  feasf.  Translate  :  lohen 
Ihe  feasting  ivas  firsl  suspcnded ;  referring  to  tlie  courses  of  food.     For  tlie 

tense  to  bc  supplied,  sce  on  21 C. Mcnsac  rcniotac ;  the  courses  tccre  re- 

moved;  the  dishes  of  food  wliich  had  fornied  the  first  part  of  tlic  entertain- 

ment. Mcnsac  as  in  21 G. 724.  Vina  corouant ;  they  ureathe  the  ivine 

cups.  Comp.  iii.  625,  G.  ii.  528.  Vina  is  cquivalent  to  pocula.  The  Ro- 
mans,  in  Virgil's  time,  were  accustomed  to  put  a  Avreath  round  the  drinking 
cup  as  well  as  round  the  mixing  bowl  or  crater.     In  the  Ilomcric  languagc, 

to  crown  the  wine  is  to  fill  tlie  goblet  to  the  brim. -725.  Fit  strcpitas 

tcctis  ;  the  noise  (of  festivity)  arises  in  the  palacc.     The  plural  tectis  express- 

es  better  than  tectuui  the  amplc  dimcnsions  of  the  house. Laqacaribas 

aarcis.;  from  the  gildcd  eeiUngs.  The  concave  spaces  formed  in  the  ccilir.gs 
by  tlie  beams  iutersecting  eacli  other  were  callcd  laquearia  or  lacunaria. 

Tliey  were  made  highly  ornamcntal   by  carving,  paint,  aud  gilding. 

727.    Fanalia ;    torches,   somcthing  like  candles,   made  by  dippiiig  cords 

{funes)  in  wax  or  pitch. Anrcis  ;  a  dissyllablc,  as  in  098. 728.  llic  ; 

frequently   an  advcrb   of  timc. Gravcm  gemmis  anroqnc ;    hcavy  wifh 

gems  and  gold;  i.  e.  a  massive  goblet  of  gold  covered  with  gems. 729. 

Qnam  is  the  object  of  implere,  supplied  after  soliti. Patcram ;  a  broad, 

shallow  cup,  cithcr  with  or  witliout  a  handle.     See  page  314,  and  596. 

730.  A  Bclo ;  supply  orti  (descendod)  frovi  Bclus.  The  Grceks  supposed 
tlie  Tyrians  to  have  sprung  from  Bchis.     Bolus  was  also  thc  nanic  of  Uido'd 

fathcr;    see    621. 731.  Xam,  elliptical   as   in  G5. liospiiibas  dare 

jnra ;  Htat  you  give  laws  for  gucsts ;  for  the  bcnefit  of  guests.  Jupitor  is 
^ii/ios  thc  i)atron  of  guests.     "  AU  strangcrs  are  from  Jovc."    Odys.scy  14,  57. 

733.  Vclis  ;  grant.  Gr.  §  26u,  K.  0  ;  Z.  g  529.     It  was  thc  practicc  of  the 

ancient  Rouians,  dcrivcd  fiom  the  Etruscans,  to  seck  first  on  all  occ;isions  tiie 

good  will  of  tlie  gods. — p^Uujns  (dlci).     Gr.  §  210 ;  Z.  §  439. .Meminissc. 

Cir.  §  183,  3,  note;  Z.  §  221. 730.  Latirnm  iibavit  honorcm ;  ponred  th« 


BOOK    FIRST.  363 

'ibation  of  liquors ;  a  small  portion  of  the  wine  was  poured  upon  the  table 

as  a  drink-ofrering  to  thc  gods. Ti7.  LibatO  (honorc) ;  the  libation  hav 

in(j  becn  made.     For  the  partiuiple  alone  in  the  ablativc  absolute,  see  Gr. 

§  257,  R.  9  ;  Z.  §  C47. Snmnio  orc  *,  to  her  lip.i;  thc  tip  of  her  mouth  ;  aa 

priinn  ora.    G.  iii.  399. 738.  Biliac  ;  a  Tyrian  or  Carthaginian  nobleman. 

Increpitans  ;  challenginf/ ;  calling  upon  hini  to  diinlc  the   pledge. Impi> 

gcr ;  not  rcluctant. Hansit ;  drained;  not  received,  as  some  translate  it. 

T39.  Se  liTOlnit;  Ji II cd  himself,  drenched  himself;  as  vappa  proluim ; 

Ilor.  Sat.  1,  5,  16. Aaro,  for  the  golden  goblet.     Gr.  §  32-1,  2. 7-10. 

Proceres.  Gr.  §  94;  Z.  §  93,  (a);  supply  bibunt. Cilliara  ;  withthe  harp  ; 

an  ablative  of  manner.     He  siugs,  accompanying  himself  with  the  harp. 
Cithara  is  often  used  for  any  stringed  instrument,  whether  <p6pfj.iy^,  \vpa,  or 
^ap&irov.     Strictly,  it  was  the  smallcr  instrument,  formcd  of  the  tortoise 
shcll  and  goats'  horns,  and  sacred  to  Mercury,  by  whom  it  was  invented.   ■     ■ 
CriaitnSf     Apollo,  the  god  of  the  lyre,  wore  long,  flowiug  hair,  and  hcnce 

his  votaries  are  so  represented.     See  ix.    638. 741.    Pcrsonat ;    sings 

aloiid. Docnit  applies  not  to  the  music,  but  to  the  natural  science  taught 

him  by  Atlas.     For  one  form  of  the  lyre,  see  page  540. Qacm  is  pre- 

ferred  to  quae,  which  is  given  in  some  editions. Atlas ;  a  Titan,  said  in 

ancient  fable  to  bear  tbe  heavens  on  his  head  and  upiifted  hands ;  and  so 
represented  in  the  famous  celestial  globe  of  marble,  preserved  from  ancient 
times,  and  formerly  in  the  Farnese  gallcry  at  Rome.  Yirgil  adopts  here 
the  idea  that  Atlas  was  a  real  personage,  and  an  astronomer,  and  also,  in 
iv.  247,  that  he  was  in  some  way  petrified,  or  at  least  symbolized,  in  mount 

Atlas. 742.  Hic  refers  to  lopas  in  distinction  from  Atlas. Laborcs ; 

ecUpses. 743.  Undc  ;  supply  si7ii.    Gr.  §  265 ;  Z.  §  552. Igncs  ;  light' 

nings ;  as  in  90. 745.  Tantam ;  so  much  ;  so  early ;  making  the  day  so 

short  in  winter. Occauo  ;  for  j»i  oceano. Yel  qnae  mora;  or  ivJiat  dc- 

lay  opposes  the  backward  nights  ;  referring  to  the  summer  nights,  wh'ch  a-e 
backward  in  coming,  being  hindered,  as  it  were,  by  the  lingering  auy. 
Comp.  G.  ii.  478-482.  This  form  of  expression  was  natural  to  the  ancients ; 
for  they  conceived  of  night  as  a  goddess  riding  in  a  chariot.     Xatural  phe- 

nomena  were  often  the  subject  of  Grcek  and  Ronian  poetry. 747.  In- 

geminant  plansn ;  redouble  uith  applause ;  for  redouble  their  applause.  This 
verb  is  thus  used  as  a  neuter  in  iv.  531,  v.  227,  G.  i.  133;  and  with  an  abla- 

tive  following,  ix.  811. 748.  Nec  non  Ct;  as  in  707. 750.    Obscrve  the 

fine  efiect  of  the  repetition,  and  revcrscd  arrangement  of  words  in  this  verse, 
bringing  the  same  word  at  the  beginning  and  end.  Other  examples  are  xii. 
29,  E.  vii.  4,  G.  iv.  342.     For  the  case  after  super,  see  Gr.  §  235,  (3),  aiid 

note  on  680. 751.  Fiiins  Aurorae  ;  Memnon.     See  489. 752.  Qnan- 

tus;  of  what  stature.  For  hcroes  wcre  conccived  to  tower  above  common 
men.  The  inquiries  of  Dido  arc  made  partly  with  the  interest  naturally 
inspired  by  tbe  subject,  and  partly  with  the  dcsire  of  prolonging  the  enter- 
lainment  in  the  society  of  Aencas. 753.  Imo  age  ;  but  nay,  (thcse  discon- 


364 


NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 


ncctcd  details  do  but  irritate  our  curiosity,)  recounl  to  us  from  their  Jirst 

beginning  thc  tdles  of  the  Greehs. Origine  docs  not  refer  to  Ihe  begianing 

of  the  siege  of  Troy,  but  to  the  final  stratagem  which  led  immediately  to  thc 
sack  of  Troy.     For  it  is  with  this  stratagem  of  the  wooden  horse  that  Aencas 

bcgins  his  narrativc  in  the  SccondBook. 155,  75Gi  Septima  acstas  ==  se/>- 

timus  auiius.     See  iutroductory  notc  to  Third  Book. 


Hector'8  body  at  the  car  of  AchiUea. 


BOOK   SECOND  365 


BOOK  SECOND. 

Aeneas  reconnts  to  Dklo  the   captnre  and  sack  of 
Troy. 

1-249.  After  a  brief  introduction  Aeneas  enters  upon  his  narrative,  whicli  begins 
witb  the  story  of  tho  wooden  horse.  The  Greeks,  now  In  the  tenth  ycar  of  the  siege, 
disheartened  by  thcir  ill  success,  resort  to  stratagem,  On  the  night  which  precedes 
the  burning  of  the  city,  they  pretend  to  give  over  the  siege,  and  to  take  ship  for  their 
homes  ;  leaving  upon  the  plain,  before  the  walls  of  Troy,  an  immense  movable  fabric 
of  wood,  made  to  resemble  a  horse,  and  of  such  size  that  it  can  be  carried  into  the  city 
only  by  enlarging  tho  gate,  or  breaking  down  a  portion  of  tho  wall. 

Withln  this  fabric  are  concealed  many  of  the  Grecian  chiefs,  while  the  army,  imder 
the  command  of  Agamemnon,  instead  of  coutinuing  the  voyage,  is  lurking  bchind  the 
island  of  Tenedos,  a  few  miles  from  Troy. 

The  Trojan  multitude  issues  from  the  gates,  and,  gathering  round  the  strango 
Image,  hesitate  whether  to  convey  it  into  the  city,  or  to  destroy  it. 

At  this  moment  tho  cunning  Binon,  who  has  purposely  sufTered  himself  to  be  m&do 
prisoner,  is  brought  before  king  Priam,  and  by  his  artful  story  gains  the  confidtsnce  of 
the  king,  and  leads  him  and  his  people  to  bolieve  that  the  wooden  horee,  onco  placed 
within  the  citadel,  will  become,  like  the  Palladium,  the  safpguard  of  Troy.  The  de- 
vice  of  Sinon  and  the  Greeks  is  aided  by  Minerva,  who  sends  two  serpents  to  slay  the 
priest  Laocoon  for  attempting  to  destroy  the  image  consecrated  to  her.  This  prodigy 
confirms  tho  Trojans  in  the  purpose  already  formed,  and  by  means  of  ropes  and  rollers 
they  convey  the  ■wooden  horse  through  the  city  to  the  citadel. 

!•  Conticucre;  they  became  silent ;  a  completed  action,  and  hcnce  in  tlie 
perfect   tensc.      Tlie   imperfect,   tenebant,   expresses  an  action  continuing. 

Comp.  i.  441-447  ;  see  Z.  §  500,  n.  1. 2.  Toro  ab  alto  ;  see  i.  700 ;  hicfh, 

not  in  a  distinctive  sense,  but  as  a  common  characteristic  of  banqueting 

couches. 3»  Rcnovare ;  supply  me.     The  subject  would  not  be  omitted 

here  m  prose.     See  Gr.  §  273,  2,  d;  Z.  §  617. 4.  Ut ;  intcrrogative  how, 

as  in  i.  466.  The  question  dcpends  on  dolorem,  whicli  imphes  here  the 
recollection  which  causes  pain ;  the  painful  memory.  Others  supply  nar- 
rando  before  ut :  you  ordcr  me  to  renew  unutterahle  grief  hy  recon?iting  hote, 

d'c. Lamcntabile  ;    ill-fated. 5.    Qnae  qne  ;    a^id  (the  things)  ichich  ; 

the  antecedent,  ea  understood,  is  in  the  same  construction  as  dolorem. 

6.  Fando  ;  while  uttering ;  a  gerund  in  the  ablative  expressing  the  relation 
of  while  and  equivalent  to  a  present  participle.     This  usage  also  occurs  oc- 

casioually  in  prose.     Sec  Madvig,  §  416,  obs.  1. -7.  Myrmidonum  Do- 

lopnm.  The  Myrmidons  and  Dolopians  wcre  Thessalian  soldiers,  followcrs 
of  Achilles,  and,  after  his  dcath,  of  his  son  Pyrrhus  or  Neoptolemus.  They 
are  specified  here  as  bcing  the  most  bloodthirsty  enemies  of  Troy.  For  the 
incremcnt  in  thcsc  words,  scc  Gr,  §  287,  cxc.  in  o  2  and  0. 8.  Tempcret; 


366 


NOTES   ON    THE   AENEID. 


Miiirrv.i. 


f 


BOOK    SECOND.  367 

sould  refrain ;  the  subjunctive  under  Gr.  §  260,  R.  5 ;  Z.  §  530;  see  also 
Gr.  §  145,  note  4.     After  temperare  in  this  sensc  the  dativc  sibi  is  undcr- 

stood.     See  Z.  §  414. Et  5  and  besides ;  it  introduces  an  additional  con- 

sideratiou,  as  in  i.  48 ;  uot  onlj  do  you  impose  upon  nie  a  painful  and  diffi- 
cult  taslv,  but  moreover  the  night  is  too  far  spent  for  me  to  entor  upou  it. 

Coelo;  for  de  coelo. 9.  Praecipitat ;  supply  se,  as  in  ix.  670,  xi.  617, 

and  trauslate  swifthj  descends.  Gr.  §  229,  R.  4.  On  the  jouruey  of  Night 
through  the  heavens  see  on  v.  721 ;  comp.  also  iii.  512,  and  below,  250. 

Saadent ;  invite.     Comp.  iv.  81. Cadeatia;  declining. lOt  k\&W\ 

Eupply  est  tibi ;  if  such  a  desire  possesses  you.  The  infinitives  cogncscei^e  and 
andire  depend  on  the  phrase  amor  est  tibi,  which  has  the  governing  power 

of  ciipis,  or  vis.     See  Gr.  §  270,  R.  1,  c ;  Z.  §  598,  2d  paragraph. 11.  Sa- 

prciuom  laborcm ;  the  final  dlsaster. 12.  Mcminissc — refngit ;  thouijhvuj 

viind  shuddcrs  to  rccall  it,  and  has  (hitlierto)  shrwik  from  it  vnth  jrief. 
Somc  understand  the  perfect  here  as  an  aorist  denoting  an  hahitual  action. 

For  esamples  of  the  perfect  joined  with  the  present,  see  x.  726,  804. 

14.  Labentibns ;  the  present  dcnoting  an  action  which  has  hesn  going  on 
and  is  still  continuing ;  Gr.  §  145,  2 :  so  mamj  years  (having  passed  and  still) 

passincj  away. 15.  Instar  ;  an  indeclinable  substantive  in  apposition  with 

equum,  and  governing  the  genitive.     It  niay  be  translated  as  larye  as.     See 

Madv.  §  280,  obs.  6. Diviaa  Paliadis  arte.     The  Greeks  were  indebted  to 

Minerva  both  for  the  plan,  and  for  the  wisdom  to  execute  it.  Homer  says, 
iii  Ody.  viii.  493,  "they  made  the  horse  with  Ifinerva;"  and  in  the  Iliad, 
XV.  71,   '•'■through  tlie  counsel  of  Minerva  they  took  Troy."     The  actual 

builder  of  the  horse  was  Epeos.     See  below,  264. 16.  Intexnnt;  they 

construct.     This  verb  is  used  like  the  simplc  texere  (see  186)  in  the  descrip- 

tion  of  wooden  structures,  and  especially  of  ships.     Comp.   xi.   326. 

Abicte ;  an  ablative  of  means ;  it  is  scanued  here  as  a  trisyllable,  ab-ye-te. 

Gr.  §  306,  (3);   Z.  §  611;  comp.  parietibus,  below,   442. IT.  Votnm; 

supply  esse.  The  Greeks  indicated  by  some  inscription  on  the  image  that  it 
was  a  votive  offering,  or  votum,  to  Minerva,  and  was  intended  to  secure 

through  her  favor  a  safe  return  to  their  country. 18.  Hnc  is  equivalent 

to  in  cquum;  latcrl  refers  more  definitely  to  the  interior  of  the  horse ;  both 
terms  limit  includimt.  Translate  as  if  it  were  written  hujus  in  latus ;  into 
(iu)  his  body.  Comp.  Cic.  Phil.  2,  13,  32 :  7ne  in  equum  Trojanum  includis. 
Thc  accusative  with  in,  or  the  dative,  is  not  unfrequeutly  substituted  for 
the  ablative  after  includere,  condere,  and  abdere,  as  in  such  verbs  tlie  notions 

both  of  motion  and  rest  are  mingled. Virnm  corpora ;  for  viros. 

Penitns  complent ;  they  fill  to  its  inmost  dcpths. 20.  Milite ;  icith  .soZ- 

diery ;  used  coUectively,  hke  custode,  i.  564.     So  also  frequently  eques  and 

pedes. 21.  In  conspei-tn;  in  sight ;  i.  e.  of  Troy. Tenedos;  Tencdos 

is  a  small  island,  about  five  miles  from  the  shore,  and  opposite  Troy. 

22.  Opnm;  for  the  genitive,  see  on  i.  14  ;  comp.  v.  73. 23.  Nuuc  tautRni 

siiins;  at  present  therc  is  only  a  bay ;  literally,  tJicre  is  so  much  (as)  a  bnij 


368  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEvD, 

Tantum  implies  so  initch  onhj  an,  noOiing  inore  than. 3Iale  fida;  unsa/e 

So  male  pinguis,  G.  i.  105;  male  amicum,  bclow,  735;  male  sana,  iv.  8.  ■ 
24.  llne  niay  bc  joined  with  condunt,  according  to  the  usage  illustrated  in 

18,  or  with  provccti. 25.  Abiisse  (eos).     Gr.  §  239,  R.  4 ;  Z.  §  605. 

Myecnas ;  put  for  tlic  whole  of  Grcece ;  as  in  i.  284. 36.  Tenciia ;  for 

Troja. Lncta ;  the  ablative  undcr  Gr.  §  251.     Tiie  woe  occasioncd  b_v 

the  ten  years'  sicge  is  tlie  ?o??^  (continued)  ^ne/rcferrcd  to. 3T.  Dcrica  ; 

for  Graeca. 39.  Tendebat  \  encampcd;  stretched  (iiis  tents).     Conip.  viii. 

i    605. 30.  Locns;  subject  of  erat  understood. 31.  Stnpet ;  is  amazed 

at ;  this  verb  is  sometimcs  followed  by  the  accusativc  in  poctry.  For  the 
fiingular  and  plural  of  the  verb  iu  the  same  sentcnce,  aftcr  a  collectivc  noun, 

sec  Gr.  §  209,  R.  11,  2;  conip.  bclow,  64. Donnm.     The  horse  was  at 

once  a  gift  to  the  Trojans,  (see  36,  44,  49,)  and  to  Minerva,  (see  above,  17.) 

Exitiale ;  fatal.     The  idea  is  tliat  of  the  narrator,  not  of  tlie  Trojan 

multitude,  who  were  gazing  at  the  fabric. 3IincrTae  ;  an  objcctive  geni- 

tive ;  the  gift  of,  that  is,  made  to  Minerva ;  lilce  the  expression  sometimcs 

used  iu  English,  "  the  sacrifice  of  God,"  meaning,  "in  honor  of  God." 

32.  Tliymoetes  is  mentioned  in  thc  Iliad,  iii.  146,  as  one  of  the  elders  of 
Troy.  A  soothsayer  had  predicted  that  a  child  should  be  born  on  a  ccrtain 
day,  who  should  cause  the  destruction  of  Troy.  On  that  day  bolh  Paris, 
thc  son  of  Priani,  and  Munippus,  the  son  of  Thymoctes,  wcre  born.  Hence 
Priam,  supposing  thc  prophecy  had  reference  to  Munippus,  ordered  both 
the  infant  and  his  mother,  Cylla,  to  be  put  to  death.  Aeneas,  therefore,  is 
in  doubt  whether  the  advice  of  Thyraoetes  to  carry  the  horse  into  the  city, 
is  given  out  of  rcsentment  and  treachcry  (dolo)  or  under  the  influencc  of 

fate  (sic  fata  ferebant.) 33.  Arce.    J^or  the  omission  of  the  preposition, 

see  on  i.  2. 34.  Ferebant ;  directed.     Ferre  is  thus  used  in  such  expres- 

sions  as  res,  ^tsus,  opinio,  tempus,  occasio,  causa,  natura—fert. 35.  Ca- 

pys ;  a  Trojan  cbief,  not  mentioncd  by  Homer,  but  by  Virgil,  i.  183,  vi.  768, 

and  elsewhere. Qnornm — menti ;  supply  c>-a<;  to  ichose  mind  there  icas, 

<kc. ;  equivalcnt  to  (juibits  melior  sejitentia  erat ;  xuho  entertaincd  a  bctter  pur- 

pose. 36.  PelagO  ;  dative  for  in  pelngns.     Comp.  i.  6,  and  note. 37. 

— qnc.  There  are  two  plans  suggcstcd  as  to  the  disposition  to  be  made  of 
the  horse ;  one,  to  dcstroy  it  at  oncc,  thc  other  to  pcnefratc  the  fabric  and 
ascertain  what  there  is  in  it.  Thesc  two  main  propositioiis  arc  scparated  by 
aut.  Tlie  first  of  them,  howcvcr,  contains  two  subordinalc  idcas  as  to  thc 
mcthod  of  destroying  the  horse :  some  advisc  to  cast  it  into  the  sea,  and 
others,  to  burn  it.     Hence  the  propricty  of — que,  rathcr  than  — ve ;  a  rcad- 

(-  ing  sometimes  adopted  here,  but  witiiout  good  authority. 10.  Prlmns ;    ( 

frst ;  Laocoon  was  forcmost  of  all  wlio  wcrc  hurrying  from  thc  Acropo- 

lis  on  hcaring  of  iho  woodcn  horso  aiid  of  tht;  dcbatc  conccniing  it. H. 

Laocoon  (Lfi-o-co-On ;  (Jr.  g  299,  2,  exc.  2)  was  acting  as  iiricst  of  Neptunc. 

See  bclow,  201. Ardcus  ;  g/owing  irilh  zea!.. 12.  Procnl ;  suppiy  cla- 

'nat.     For  the  cllipsis  of  vcrba  dedariindi^  scc  on  i.  7t>. Insanln ;  suppiy 


BOOK    SECOND.  369 

ettista? 13«  Creditis  ?     In  Tchement  languagc  the  interrogative  parti- 

cles  titmm  and  — ne  are  often  omitted. rilaj  used  here  because  the 

question  implics  a  negation  :  nulla  puictis.     See  ArnoId's  Lat.  Prose,  389, 

390. 44.  Carere  dolis ;  to  be  witJtout  sfratagems.     The  ablative  is  under 

Gr.  §  250,  2,  (2) ;  Z.  §  460. 45.  AcUivi ;  for  Graeci.     Comp.  i,  242. 

46,  47.  Olachina — inspectnra.  Yirgil  has  in  mind  the  siege  towers  of  a  later 
period,  which,  being  rollcd  up  to  tlie  walls  of  the  besieged  city,  enabled  the 
assailants  from  the  several  stories  and  froin  the  summit  of  the  tower  to  hurl 
their  mlssiles,  and  to  pass  over  upon  planlis  to  the  battlements  of  the  be- 
sieged.  Thus  the  Greeks  might  intend  to  use  the  wooden  horse.  For  the 
use  of  the  future  participle  here,  see  Gr.  §  274,  R.  6,  (a) ;  Z.  §  639.  Ven- 
tura  dcsuper  rather  refers  to  the  desccnt  of  those  in  the  machine  upon  the 

city,  than  to  the  machine  itself. 48.  Aliqnis  is  occasionally  employed  in 

the  sense  of  alius  quis,  some  otker,  and  is  so  understood  here  by  Thiel  and 

Forbiger. Error ;  deccpjtion. 49.  Qnidqnid  est  5  the  indicative  is  com- 

monly  used  after  the  pronouns  and  adverbs  which  are  doubled,  or  which 

havc  the  sufBx  cumque.     See  on  i.  387. Et ;  even. Dona.     See  on  31. 

51.  In  latus  inqne  alvnm.     He  hurled  the  spear  with  such  violence  that 

it  penetrated  uot  only  into  the  frame,  but  even  into  the  belly  or  inner  cavi- 
ties  of  the  beast.     For  the  geuder  o(  alvus,  see  Gr.  §  49.     On  the  repetition 

of  in,  sce  Z.  §  743. Feri,  as  in  v.  818. Compagibns  is  joined  with 

curvam  (==  cxcrvatam)  as  an  ablative  of  means :  curvinff  with  jointed  work. 

52.  IUa  5  it ;  the  spear. Recnsso  ;  ablative  absolute  with  ?<to'o  ;  t/ie 

womb  reverberating.     The  participle,  according  to  Forbiger,  is  equivalent  to 

repercusso. 53.    Cavae  cavernae.      Forbiger  compares  this  tautological 

expression  to  similar  poetic  arcbaisms  in  Lucretius  and  Plautus ;  as,  anxius 
angor,  Luc.  i.  826;  sonitus  sonans,  id.  iii.  816;  pulchra  pulchritudo,  Plaut. 

Mil.  iv.  1,  13. Gcmitnm  is  the  hollow  sound  given  back  by  the  wooden 

fabric.     Comp.  iii.   555;  ix.  709. 54.    Si  fata;  supply /i«'sse«<;  if  the 

fates  of  the  gods  had  been,  or  had  so  willed.     Comp.  433. Si — fnlsset ; 

if  our  mind  had  not  been  perverse  ;  referring  to  the  infatuation  of  the  multi- 

tude. 55.  Impnlerat ;  he  had  induced  us ;  the  indicative  instead  of  the 

regular  construction  in  the  subjunctive,  impulisset,  which  would  not  so 
vividly  have  expressed  the  conviction  of  the  narrator.     See  Gr.  §  259,  R.  4 ;   , 

Z.  §  519;  Arnold's  Lat.  Pr.  448. Faedare ;  to  lay  violcnt  hands  on ;  to  t-r 

tear  in  picces.— 57.  Ecce.     A  striking  incident  now  diverts  their  attentior 

from  the  horse. Manns ;  the  Greek  accusative ;  bound  as  to  his  hands 

having  his  hands  bound.     See  on  i.  228. 59.  Dardanidae ;  Dardanian 

us^ed  udjectivcly  with  pastores. Vcnientibns  ;  join  with  attiderat. CO. 

IIOC  ipsnm  ;  this  very  jmrpose ;  namely,  that  of  being  brought  before  king 

Priam. Strneret ;    might  exccute.      The    subjunctive    denotes   the   pur- 

pose  of  obtiderat. 61.  Fidens  animi ;  confident  in  spirit.     Gr.  §  213,  R. 

1,  (2);  Z.  §  438. In  ntrnmqne  ;  for  either  issue  ;  for  either  of  the  alter- 

natives  expressed  in  the  following  lines.     For  the  gfnder  sefe  Gr.  §  20?,  R 


370  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

7,(2). C2>  Yersare  dolos;  to  follow  out  Iiis  stratagcms.     Xlie  infinitivei 

may  be  joincd  with  utrumquc  as  nouns  in  appositiou.     Some  prefer  to  niake 

tbem  depend  diiectly  on  paratus. 6i.  Circnmfosa  rnlt  •,  more  livcly  than 

circumfundUur ;  the  youth  pat/icr  rdpidh/  rouuJ.     For  the  «M»(6£r  of  thc 

Tcrbs,  scc  above  on  31. 65,  66.  Ab  nno — oranes  *, //•<)/«  one  uncked  act 

lcarn  (to  know)  all  the  Crrccks  ;  from  the  treachery  of  one  understand  thcm 
all.     Such  is  thc  intcrpretation  of  Hcyne,  which  is  supported  by  tlic  follow- 

ing  imitation  of  Silius,  vl.  39 :  Nosces  Fabios  certamine  ab  nno. 67.  In 

medio  eonspcctu ;  in  the  midst  of  thcir  vicw ;  iu  thc  midst  of  thc  cirelc  of 

spectators  gazing  upon  him. 68.  Pbrygia;  Trojan ;  as  in  i.  182.     Ob- 

scrve  the  spoudaie  vcrse. 69.  Dcn.     The  first  objcct  of  Sinon  is  to  gaiu 

the  pity  and  confidence  of  thc  Trojans  by  pretending  to  have  becn  cruelly 
treatcd  by  his  countrymen,  and  to  have  been  compclled  to  flce  for  refuge 

even  to  his  worst  enemies. Inqait.     Gr.  §  279,  6  ;  Z.  §  802. Tl.  Sn- 

per  ;  advcrbially,  morcover ;  as  i.  29,  iv.  606. T2.  Pocuas  cnm  sangaine  ; 

ioT  poenas  sanguincas  ;  bloody  punislimcnt.     Conip.  iv.  514,  x.  C17. 73. 

Qao  gemita  ;  by  which  lamentation.  The  Latin  prcfers  tlie  close  connectiou 
of  the  relativc  whcre  the  Englisli  morc  frequcntly  employs  the  demonstra- 
tive  or  personal  prououn  with  a  coimcctivc  particlc  ;  and  bi/  this  lamentation. 

See  Gr.  §  206,(17);  Z.  §  803. CoOTersi ;  supply  sunt. Et  iu  prose 

would  stand  before  cotnpressus.  "  In  poctry,  ct,  nec,  (rarely  aiit,  vel)  and 
aed,  sed  cnim,  are  sometimcs  put  aftcr  a  word  in  the  second  member  of  a 

sentcncc."     Madv.  §  47 1,  d. Quo  sangnine  cretus  ;  of  uhat  lincage  he  is 

sprung ;  si7  is  understood.     Thc  pocts  use  <:re^«s  from  cresco  like  na<««.     Z. 

§  148. 75.  Quid  ferat ;  ^diat  (iuformation)  he  brings.     Comp.  161,  viii. 

119.     The  questions  in  tlie  subjunctive  in  this  passage  depcnd  onfari.    Sce 

Gr.  §  265. Memoret ;  that  he  dcclare ;  the  mode  is  governed  by  A«r<a- 

mur.     Gr.  §  273,2;  Z.  §  624.     Hortari  is  followed  both  by  the  infinitive 

and  subjunctive. CaptO  ;  supply  siii  ;  ichat  ground  of  confidence  he  has 

as  a  cap/irc. 76.  Formidine.     Ile  lays  asidc  his  pretendcd  fear. 77. 

Qnodcnmque  fucrit ;  ichalcver  the  result  shall  have  been.  This  is  the  iuter- 
pretation  of  Servius,  followed  by  Thicl  and  othcr!?.  'Wundcrlich  fiuds  that 
ihc  future  perfcct  is  uot  only  uscd  relatively  to  ihefuture,  but  that  it  is  also 
used  absolutely,  as  in  thc  following  example  from  Caes.  Bell.  Gall.  4,  25  : 
ego  certe  mecum  reipnblicae  atque  imperatori  ojficium  pracstitero.     Quodcwn- 

qite  is  uscd  hcre  substar.tively   for  quidquid. 78.  Mc ;  subjcct  of  essc 

undcrstood. IIoc  ;  object  of /«^for  undcrstood. Sinonem  ;  the  namc 

is  hcre   an   cmphatic  substitute   for  mc.     Comp.  5.  48. 80.  Finxit ;  has 

rendcred ;  for  thc  modc  aftcr  si,  scc  Gr.  §  259;  Z.  §  517,  notc. Sl.  Faii- 

do  ;  b;/  hcarsaij,  or  rcport ;  au  ablative  of  mcans,  as  iu  thc  plu-ase/<i)/(A)  ou- 

diir.    Scc  Z.  §  220. Allqaod  nomcn;   ang  mcntion. 82.  Palamedi;! 

Belidac;  Palamedes  tlu  d*-srciida>il  of  JStlus.  Palamcdes  was  ihc  son  of 
N'auprnis.  king  of  Euboea,  who  dcrivcd  liis  liucage  from  the  Egypliau  king 
Ilclus.     Virgil  follows  tlic  tradition  which  ascribes  tlic  di'n<li  ol'  rnl  imcdcs 


BOOK    SECOND.  3Y1 

to  Ulysses.     The  i  in  Belides  is  herc  lengtheued,  as  an  cxccption  to  Gr. 

g  291,  4. 83.  FalSii  snb  proditione ;    ttndcr  a  fahe  charrfc  of  trca.<!on. 

Thiercalls  this  usage  of  sm6  a  Grccism. 84.  Infaudo  Indifio ;  hy  wicked 

Ustimony.  Through  the  contrivance  of  Ulysses  a  letter  purportlng  to  be 
Bigned  by  king  Priam,  aud  a  quantity  of  gold,  were  secreted  in  tlie  tcnt  of 
Falamedes,  aud  these  being  produced  against  him,  he  was  stoned  to  death 

by  the  Grceks  on  the  charge  of  correspondence  with  the  enejuy. 85. 

Demisere  neei ;  fhey  have  cast  doim  to  death;  so  morti  demittere,  v.  G92. 

Cassani  Inmine  ;  dcprivcd  of  Vujht;  i.  e.  of  life.  Comp.  cassis  a^there,  xi. 
104.  The  ablative  may  be  referred  to  Gr.  §  250,  2,  (1);  Z.  §  462;  or,  with 
Thiel,  we  may  consider  cassus  as  derived  from  careo  and  followed  by  its  case. 

Lngent ;  they  mourn  him  because  they  need  his  wise  counsels.     It  was 

his  reputation  for  wisdom  which  had  excited  the  jealousy  of  Ulysses. 

86.  IUi— annis;  this  clause  answers  to  the  conditional  proposition  com- 
mencmg  with  si ;  my  father,  being  poor,  sent  me  hither  to  the  war  from  the 
first  ycars  (of  the  war)  as  his  companion,  being  also  related  to  him  by  hlood. 

Et  connects  comitcm  and  sanguine  propinquum  as  two  consideratious 

on  account  of  which  Sinon  was  sent ;  more  fully  expressed  it  would  be :  be- 
cause  he  wished  me  to  be  his  comjyanioti,  and  because  I  icas  nearly  related  to 

jii,n^ 87.  Panper;  as  in  iii.  615,  the  term  is  calculated  to  excite  compas- 

sion  in  the  hearers. la  arma  ;  for  in  bellum. 88.  Staftat  rcgno  ;  flour- 

ished  in  his  royal  dlgnity ;  the  ablative  as  in  i.   268. Regum  \igebat 

,  conciliis ;  was  strong  in  the  assembUcs  of  the  kings.     See  on  85.     The  Gre- 

cian  kings  held  frequent  councils  in  their  camp  before  Troy. 89.  Et  nos.; 

lalso;  so  also  the  plural  is  used  in  139. qne— que.     Comp.  i.  18. 

90.  Gessimus ;  sustained. nixi ;  for  this  form  of  the  geuitive  see  Gr. 

8  86. 91.  Hand  ignota ;  things  hy  no  means  unhnown.     The  cunning  of 

^Sinon  shows  itself  in  counecting  his  pretended  misfortunes  with  the  real 
ones  of  Palamedes,  the  account  of  which  has  doubtless  already  reached  the 

T,.ojaus. Snperis  .lb  oris  ;  from  the  upper  world ;  from  this  region  of  the 

livin^'  to  the  lowcr  world,  sub  umbras.     Comp.  iv.  660.     Por  the  tense  after 

postquam  see  Gr.  §  259,  (2),  d;  Z.  §  506. 92.  In  tencbris ;  in  gloomy 

solitude. 94.   Mc  ;   the  subject  of/o?-e  understood. Tnlisset;  should 

bring  it  about ;  literally,  should  have  carried.  The  pluperfect  subj.mctive 
serves  as  a  future  perfoct  subjunctive  iu  connection  with  past  tenses.     Gr. 

§  260,  R.  7,  (l) ;  Z.  §  496,  5. 95.  Ad  ArgOS  ;  for  ad  Graeciam.     Comp. 

i.  285'.     On  theVorms  of  the  word  see  Gr.  §  92,  4 ;  Z.  §  89.     Palamcdes  was 

'  from  Euboea. 96.  Odia.     The  hatred,  namely,  of  Ulysses. 9T.  Uinc  ; 

from  hence;  from  this  cause.     Comp.  unde,  i.  6.     But  Thiel  understands  it 

of  time;  from  fhat  time  forwarl Prima  labes  ;  thefirst  token  of  disease. 

, g'g   99.     The  infinitives  here  aie  historical :    Ulysses  was  always  terrify- 

ing,  was  disseminating,  was  seeking.  Gr.  §  209,  K.  5,  note ;  Z.  §  599,  note. 
Conscius;  conscious  of  his  crimes ;  kuowiug  his  owu  guilt,  and  the  danger 
of  bcing  exposed  by  me. Arma ;  wcapons;  mcpns  for  my  destruction. 


372  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID, 

100.  Enini  introduces  the  ground  of  the  foregoing  statcment :  he  wa« 

ccrtainlv  sccking  to  dcstroy  mc,  for  hc  did  not  rcst,  &c. Calcbante  mln» 

Utro;  Calchas  heiurf  his  agcnt.  Calchas  was  thc  prophct  iind  prii-st  of  tlic 
Grccian  arniy  at  Troy.     Siiion  artfully  brealis  off  iicre  in  ordcr  to  c.xcitc  the 

Trojans  to  farthcr  inquiries. 101.  Scd  antem ;  hnt  howcver ;  tlicse  two 

partidcs  are  found  thus  conncctcd  nowhere  clsc  in  Virgil.     Tlie  sccond  ad- 

vcrsative  sccms  intended  to  add  additional  emphasis. Ingrata  ;  painful ; 

i.  e.  to  Sinon.  But  Forbiger  understands  things  unacceptahle,  or  of  no  in- 
tcrest  to  thc  TroJa7is,  and  which  can  gain  no  favor  ivith  thon  towards  Sinon. 

102.  Sl  \  nearly  equivalent  liere  to  quoniam. Omncs  ;  all  the  Greelis; 

wiietlier  such  as  Palamedes  and  Sinon,  or  such  as  Ulysse.*. 103.  Id  \ 

this ;  that  which  I  have  now  narrated  to  you  concerning  myself:  if  you 

kold  all  (of  us)  in  thc  same  estiniation,  ajid  it  suffices  to  have  heard  this. 

Jauiiludnm  ;  now  at  once.  It  implics  that  the  act  has  ahcady  been  long  de- 
layed,  and,  tlicrcforc,  sliould  be  instantly  executed.     Sce  Gr.  g  191,  R.  G  ; 

Z.  §  287. 101.  Ithacns  ;  the  Ilhacan,  Ulysscs  ;  a  poctic  forra  for  Ilhaccn- 

si.s. Magno.     For  the  case  sce  Gr.  §  252,  R.  3 ;  Z.  §  456.     "With  TClit 

and  merccntnr,  woidd  zvish,  tvould purchase,  the  protasis.  si  possint,  is  to  be 

supplied.     See  Gr.  g  2G1,  R.  4. .4tridac ;  thc  sons  of  Atreus ;  Menelaus 

and  Agamemnon. lOT.  Proscqnitnr;  procceds.     This  vcrb  in  this  sensc, 

and  without  an  object,  sccms  to  occur  only  here. 109.  Molirl ;  to  prc- 

pare.     The  term  implics  effort  to  overcome  difficulties. Bcllo  ;  join  with 

fessi. 110.  Fccisscnt ;  would  that  they  had  so  done.    Gr.  §  263  ;  Z.  §  571. 

H"  they  had  gonc  away  at  that  time,  Sinon  would  not  have  been  condemned 

as  thc  victim  for  sacrifice. 111.  Euntcs ;  whcn  dcparting ;  not  actually 

on  thcir  v.-uy,  which  the  prcscnt  participle  would  usualiy  mcan,  but  when  on 

the  point  of  going.     Gr.  §  274,  R.  1 ;  comp.  ix.  243. 112.  Trabibns.   Gr. 

§  287,  3,  exc.  in  a  2. 114.  Suspcnsi ;  unccrtain  ;  doubting  what  to  do 

Enrypylnm  ;  Eurypylus,  a  Thcssalian  chicf,  who  joincd  thc  Grccian  ex- 

pedition  with  forty  ships  from  Ormcnion. Scitantem  ;  to  considt ;  if  tho 

reading  is  correct,  we  must  consider  this  a  prescnt  participlc  denoting  a 
purpose.     Comp.  i.  519;  Gr.  §  274,  R.  2,  (a).     The  reading  scitatum  lacka 

authority. 115.  Adytis ;  frojn  the  sanctuary.     For  the  casc  see  on  i.  358. 

116.  IMacastls;  for  placavistis.     See  Gr.  §  162,  7  ;  Z.  §  160,  (a). 

Vlrgine  caesa;  with  a  virgin  slain.  Gr.  §  274,  R.  5.  Thc  Grccian  chicfa 
had  ai;scmbled  at  Aulis  before  sailing  for  Troy,  and  bcing  detaincd  by  con- 
trary  winds,  wcre  instructcd  to  sacrifice  Iphigenia,  thc  daughtcr  of  Agamcni- 
non,  as  a  propitiatory  oflfering  to  Diana.  Virgil  follows  somc  tradition 
which  rei)rescnted  thc  victim  to  have  been  actually  slain.  According  to  tlic 
ordinary  account  Iphigcnia  was  savcd  by  the  interposition  of  Diana,  and 

convcyed  to  Tauris. 118.  Qnaercndl ;  supply  .wn^ Litandnm  ;  a  sac- 

rificc  viust  hc  niadc ;  litcrally,  it  is  to  hc  irpiatol. 119.  Argoilca  ;  (ireciiin. 

A  Grcck  must  now  be  slain,  just  as  tlic  victini  at  ihe  bcginning  of  the  war 
was  a  Greck.— —  Voi ;  rcsponsc. l't;  when. Tnlgi ;  of  thi  tnullitude; 


BOOK    SECOND.  37o 

the  common  soldiery. I2O5  121i  Inia  OSSa  5    through  our  inmost  bones. 

The  marrow  wa,s  regardod  as  tho  seat  of  animal  heat      Comp.  iii.  308,  ix, 

4Y5. Cni  filta  parcnt ;  (fearing)/o7'  whom  thefntcs  ai-e  prcparinff  (death). 

This  and  the  following  qucstion  depend  on  metucntium  iniplied  in  the  fore- 

going  cucurrit  trcmor. Qnem  poscat  Apollo  ;  whom  Apollo  ckmands  (for 

the  sacrifice  ;)  i.  e.  toho  it  is  that  thc  oracle  of  Apollo  mcans. 122.  liic  ; 

here ;  as  an  adverb  of  tinie.     Comp.  ihi.,  40;  i.  128,  et  al. 123.  Protra- 

hit ;  drags  forth  ;  Calchas  prctends  to  be  reluctant. Ea  nauiiua  (livani ; 

thcse  commands  of  the  gods;    Ulysses  demands  of  Calehas  what    person 

is  meant  by  these  divine  revelations. 124.  Jam  canebant ;  ^vere  already 

foretellincj. 125.  Artificis ;  of  the  plotter.     The  cuuning  of  Ulysses,  as 

Sinon  wi^ed  the  Trojans  to  understand,  was  not  exercised  in  devising 
the  oracle,  for  that  was  autlientie,  but  iu  turning  the  oracle  to  his  pri- 
vate  purpose  by  causing  his  tool  Calchas  to  single  out  Sinon  as  the  victim. 

Ventara  ;  what  was  to  come. 126.  Bis  qaiuos.     Conip.  i.  71,  381,  and 

note. Tectas  ;  tvith  hidden  purpose;  covered  in  respect  to  his  mind.     So 

Heyne  ;  but  Ilenry,  quoted  by  Forbiger,  talies  it  litcrally,  covered:  "shut 

up  in  his  tent." 127.    Proderc  ;    to  announcc 129.    Composito  ;  •  hy 

agreement ;  for  ex  composito.     Calchas  liad  a  private  understanding  with 

Ulysses,  as  to  the  individual  who  should  be  assigne,d  to  the  altar. 131. 

Coaversa  (ea) ;  equivalent  to  earttm  rerum  conversionem ;  the  turning  of 
these  things.  See  Gr.  §  274,  R.  5,  (a) ;  Z.  §  637.  Thcy  (readily)  suffered  the 
turning  of  those  dangers,  whick  each  fcared  for  himself  to  the  destruction  of 
one  unhappy  wretch;  because  wheu  once  I  was  declared  the  victim  they 

were  all  relieved  from  farther  apprehensions. 132.  Parari ;  wcre  hcitig 

prepared;  historical  iufinitive. 133.  Salsae  fruges ;  for  niola  salsa ;  the 

saltedmeal.     Comp.  iv.  517.     Grain  poundcd,  parchcd,  and  mixed  with  salt, 

was  thrown  upon  the  sacrifice. Vittac  ;  fdlets,  or  twistcd  bands  of  white 

and  red  wool,  adorned  the  heads  both  of  thc  priest  and  of  the  victim. • 

134.  Fatcor ;  I  confess;  the  tcrm  implies  that  it  mighl  be  considered 
culpable  to  have  shrunk  from  a  sacrifice  demanded  by  religion.  But  Sinon 
knows  that  the  Trojans  will  hold  him  guiltless,  because  he  was  unjustly 

doomed  to  the  altar. Yincnla ;  "  The  cords  with  which  he  was  bound 

when  being  led  to  the  altar."     Heyne.     Others  merely  understand  impris- 

onment,  londs. 135,  136.  Obscurns  delitni ;  unseen  I  lay  hid;  hid  aiid 

unsec7i.     Comp.  vi.  268. Dnm  vcla  dcdissent ;  until  they  should  have  set 

sail ;  another  instance  of  the  plupcrfect  subjunetive  useji  as  a  future  perfect 

in -narj-ation.     See    on   94. Si   fortc  ;    if  perhaps ;    thc    uncertainty   ia 

whcther  the  Greeks  would,  aftcr  all,  set  sail  without  having  made  the  ap- 

pointed  sacrifiee  of  one  of  their  own  countrymen. 139.  Et  pocuas ;  the 

reading  ad pocnas  docs  not  rest^o.n  good  authority.  We  must  regard  quos 
as  an  accusative  of  the  person,  and  poenas  as  an  accusative  of  the  thing, 
under  Gr.  §  231;  Z.  §  393:  from  whom.  perchance  thcy  will  hoih  demand 
punishment  on  account  of  my  escape,  and  will  Sipiute  this  (my)  fault  by  the 


374 


NOTES    ON    TIIE    AENEID. 


death  of  (my)  unhnppy  (fricnds).     Rcposcere  also  takcs  two  accupativcs  it 

vii.  606. 14 !•  Qnad ;  whcrefore,  as  to  whkh ;  as  in  Grcck   o  for  «o^'  '6, 

S«*  8.     Gr.  §  206,  (14);  comp.  vi.  363. Tc  ;  addrcssca  to  rriam. 142. 

Per ;  tlie  following  clause  suggests  the  object  of  per :  if  there  u  still  aiiy 
pure  fa/lh   remainiriy  anywhere   among  (to)  men,  by  this  I  adjiire   thee. 

Comi).  vi.  1.-/J;  X.  507,  903. Qnae  restet.     Gr.  §  264,  6;  Z.  §  501. 

143.  Laborum  ;  misfortuncs ;  for  thc  case  see  Gr.  §  215;  Z.  §  442. 144. 

.inimi ;  a  spirit ;  put  for  the  person  himself. Xon  digna  ;  undeserved. 

145.  Laerimis.     Thiel  aud  Ladewig  make  this  an  ajjlative  of  cause :  by  rca- 
son  of  these  tears ;  others  consider  it  a  dative;  to  these  tears  ;  for  illi  lacri- 

manti. 145.  ritro  ;  Servius  explains  by  insuper,  moreover,  not  spontane- 

ously,  because  it  is  his  pathetic  story  which  has  called  forth  sympathy.     For 

the  infinitivc  after  jubet,  see  Gr.  §  273,  2,  (d);  Z.  §  617. 148.  Amissos ; 

whom  you  have  lost. Hinc;    henceforth ;    adv.   of  time. Graios  ;  for 

the  case,  sce  Gr.  §  216  ;  Z.  §  439. 149.  Haec  edissere  vera  ;  declare  thcse 

things  to  me  true  (truthfully) ;  edisscre  imperative  from  c,  dis,  and  sero. 

150.  Qno ;  whereto,  for  ivhat  purpose.-—— 151,  Qnac  rcligio,  etc. ;  ivhat  de- 

votion  (token  of  devotion)  is  it,  or  (if  nonc)  ivhat  enyine  of  war? 154. 

Aeterni  ignes;  pcrpdual  fres ;  sun,  moon,  and  stars.     Comp.  iii.  599;  ix, 

429. 155.   Enses;   the  sacrificial  knives.     See  page  596.     All  the  holy 

objccts  Sinon  appeals  to,  are  witnesses  of  the  outrage  he  has  suffercd,  and 

that  he  is  held  by  no  tie  of  loyalty  to  bis  countrymen. 157.  Fas ;  supply 

est. 158.  Ferrc  snb  anras;  to  brinr/  to  the  light ;  sub,  up  to. 159.  81 

qna  tegnnt ;  if  thcy  (the  Grceks)  conceal  any  thing.     For  the  form  of  thc 

pronoun,  sce  Gr.  §13-8,2;  Z.  §  136. 160.    Promissis ;   the  prose  con- 

slruction  is  in  promissis  maneas ;  abide  by  i\iy  promiscs ;  comp.  viii.  643; 

stareh  more  common  than  ?na?icre  in  this  phrasc. 163.  Anxiliis  stctit ; 

depended  on   the'  aid.     Gr.  §  245,  ii.  5 ;  Z.  §  452,  second   paragraph. 

Ex  qno;/m.'i  u-hat  time;  relative  to  ra  i7/o,  below,  169. 164.  Tydides. 

See   on  i.  97. Scd  enim;   clliptical   as  in   i.  19:  hct  (thcir   confidcnce 

failcd)  for,  dx.     For  the   position 

of  the  words,  .see  on  73. 165. 

Fatale  Palladinm  ;  the  Palladium 
of  destiny ;  so  termcd  bccause 
the  fate  of  Troy  dcpcnded  on  its 

prcscrvation. Aggrcssi ;    having 

altempted.  Thc  PaUadium  was  ii 
sniall  image  of  I'allas  which  was 
bclicvcd  to  havc  fallcn  from  hcavcn, 
and  was  guardod  by  tlie  Trojans 
\\'n\\  grcat  carc,  bciiig  e\eM  bouud 
lo  thc  wall  of  the  tcmplc  by  chains, 
bccausc  the  safcty  of  thc  city  dc- 
pcnded  on  thc  posscssion  of  the 


Dltimcdos  aiid  Ulypsc  a. 


BOOK    SECOND.  375 

image. Avcllerc;  to  (ear  away ;  referring  to  the  fact  tliat  the  Palladium 

was  boiind. 168t  Vittas ;  the  fillets  round  the  head  of  the  image. 

Flncre,  referri,  Historical  infinitives ;  corap.  98  ;  translate  :  from  that  time 
the  hope  of  the  Greeks  hegan  to  wane,  and  gliding  down,  to  be  carried  back 
again.  This  metaplior  seems  to  be  drawn  from  a  ship  wliich  the  rowers 
have  suddenly  ceased  to  propel  against  the  current,  so  that  it  again  falls 
down  the  stream.     Such  is  Wagner's  explanation,  wliich  is  sustained  by  G. 

i.  200.     Others  understand  it  diiferently. 171.  Ea  signa;  ihese  tokens ; 

i.  e.  tokens  of  these  things,  or  of  her  displeasurc.     Comp.  iii.  50.5. TritO' 

nia  ;  an  appellation  of  Minerva,  either  derived  from  the  name  of  a  stream  in 
Boeotia  called  Triton,  or  from  that  of  the  Libyan  lake  Tritonis.     Both  of 

them  are  mentioned  by  different  myths  as  places  of  her  birth. Monstrls  ; 

b>/  prodigies. 172.    Castris  ',    ablative. SimnhKrnm  5    the    Palladium. 

173.  Lnmlmhns  aTTettis  \  from  her  stardng  egeballs. 174.  Ipsa;  she 

herself ;  the  image  itself  bodily,  as  opposed  to  its  parts ;  not  only  the  eyes 

glared,  but  the  whole  image  was  animated. Ter.     See  on  i.  91. Solo. 

Gr.  §  24r2. ^Dictn.    See  on  i.  111. 175.  Emicnlf;  Uajied  up. 176. 

Canit ;  dcclares,  announces.  As  priests  and  prophets  ahvays  made  their 
revelations  and  uttered  tlieir  prayers  in  metrical  formulas,  the  verb  cano,  to 
sing  or  chant,  comes  to  signify  both  prophecy,  announce,  and  pray.  Comp. 
124.  That  an  image  should  show  such  miraculous  signs  of  anger,  is  a  suf- 
ficient  reason  to  the  minds  of  the  Trojans,  as  Sinon  is  wcU  aware,  for  the 
hdvice  of  Calchas  and  the  hasty  departure  of  the  Greeks.  There  is  there- 
fore  no  difBculty  now  in  believing  that  the  Greeks  have  actually  gone,  and 
that  what  Sinon  adds  about  the  destination  of  the  wooden  horse  is  reason- 

able  and  true. 178.  Omina  ni  rcpetant  Argis;  unless  they  seek  the  otneris 

again  in  Greece.  Gr.  §  254.  They  had  before  sailing  for  Troy  taken  the 
oraens  at  Aulis ;  and  they  must  now  repeat  the  ceremony  either  there  or  in 
some  other  part  of  Greece.  Perhaps  Virgil  has  reference  to  the  practice  of 
Roraan  generals,  who,  under  certain  circumstances,  went  back  to  Kome  to 

renew  the  auspices. Xumcn;  the  divinity ;  meaning  the  palladium  itself; 

though  some  understand  by  the  term  here  thc  divine  favor ;  an  interpreta- 

tion  inconsistent  with  the  following  line. 179.  Qncd— arexere  ;   ichich 

(says  Siuon)  they  have  carricd  away.  This  is  not  the  statement  of  Calchas, 
which  would  have  been  quoted  indirectly  here  and  therefore  in  the  subjunctive 

mode,  bat  the  language  of  Sinon  himself. 180.  Qaod  petiere — paraut ; 

as  to  the  fact  that  they  have  sought,  &c.,  (it  is  because)  they  are  p>rcparing. 

Gr.  §  206,  (14);  Z.  §  626,  note,  and  §  627. 181.  Arma  deosque ;  rein- 

forcements  for  war  and  the  favor  of  the  gods. 183.  Moniti ;  being  in- 

structed;    namely,  by  Calchas. Pro ;    as  a  substitute  for,  in  place  of. 

Ilere  Sinon  comes  to  the  most  delicate  part  of  his  story ;  he  must  give  a 
plausible  reason  both  for  thc  building  of  the  horse,  and  for  its  vast  size,  and 
ne  must  makc  such  suggestions  as  shall  induce  the  Trojans  to  take  it  into 
the  city. 184.  Qnac  piaret ;  to  atone  for.     Gr.  §  2(54,  5 ;  Z.  §  567. 


376  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

185,  186.  The  cmpliasis  is  on  vnvtcnsam  and  coelo.  They  wcrc  not  onlj 
adviscd  to  build  this  substitute  for  the  ralludium,  but  to  build  it  of  vast 
dimensions,  and  to  rcar  it  to  heavcn,  so  that  the  Trojans  niight  not  get  it 
into  tlic  city  to  scrvo  as  a  ncw  ralladium,  and  that  thcy  might  bc  tempted 
through  suspicion  to  lay  violent  liands  upon  it,  and  thus  incur  the  angcr  of 

Minerva. 186.  Roboribns  ;  the  mcans  of  atioUere. Coclo  ;  dative  for 

ad  coclum.     Comp.    8. 187.  Portis ;  the  way  or  route  by  which  a  mo- 

tion  proceeds  is  put  in  tlie  ablativc  without  a  preposition.     Gr.  §  255,  2 ; 

Madvig,  §  274. Moenia  ;  for  urbem. Possit ;  the  prcse^it  subjunctive 

shows  that  jussit  is  the, pcr/cct  dejinite :  has  ordercd.     Gr.  §  258,  i.  1 ;  Z. 

§  512. 188.  Nen;  for  ncve;  or  lcsf. Autiqna  snb  religione ;  und^r 

thcirformcr  worship  ;  under  the  samc  religious  sccurity  as  that  which  tiicy 

had  enjoyed  under  the  Palladium. IVaiu  violasset ;  'for  (said  Calchas)  if 

your  hand  shoidd  violaie  ;  this  is  the  continuation,  in  the  oblique  for;n,  of 
what  Calchas  had  stated.  Saying,  thinking,  &c.,  are  often  implicd  in'tho 
foregoing  verb,  as  hcre  in  jussit.  See  Gr.  §  270,  R.  2,  b ;  Z.  §  620.  For 
the  infinitive  and  subjunctive  here,  see  Gr.  §  266,  2,  and  R.  4;  Z.  §  603. 

190.  Qnod  onien;  ichich  token,  which  ncin;  by  metonymy  for  the  de- 

struction  indicatcd  by  the  omen. Ipsnm  ;  Calchas. 193.  Htro.     For- 

biger  interprets:  from  afar.  But  all  the  nations  of  Asia  allicd  with  Troy 
may,  after  the  present  occasion  of  hostility  shall  have  bcen  forgottcn,  be  Icd 
by  a  common  impulsc,  and  without  provocaiioti,  to  makc  war  upon  Grecce. 
Hence  the  usual  signification  of  uliro,  spontanco^isly,  niay  be  takcn  here. 

191.  Nostl-OS  rcfcrs  to  the  Greeks. Ea  fata ;  such  fatcs ;  such  de- 

Ptruction  awalts  the  Grccian  posterity  if  the  horse  gocs  into  the  cit}-,  as 

would  fall  upon  the  Trojans  if  they  should  injurc  the  horse. 196.  Crc- 

dita  res;   thc   story  was   bclicved. 197.  Larissacns;  dcrivcd  froni  La- 

rissa,  an  ancient  city  of  Thessaly.     Gr.  §  128,  6,  h. 198.  Millc ;  a  round 

number;  Uomer,  II.  ii.  .194,  sq.,  makcs  the  exact  number  of  thc  Greciau 

ships  1186. 199.  Dic.     Sce  on  122. Mm6 ',  anolhcr  evcnt.     For  the 

neuter  adjective  used  substantively,  sce  Gr.  §  205,  R.  7,(2),  (3);  Z.  §  363. 

Majus;    even   a  greatcr  incident   than  the  adventurc   of  Sinon. 

200.  Improvida  pectora  tnrb.-it;  according  to  Thiel:  disturbs  our  mind^ 
alrcady  surpriscd;  acconling  to  Hcyne  and  others,  an  in.-^tance  of  prolcp- 
sis:   disturbs   our   jninds   so   that   tJiey   bccomc   imprudeni ;   so    that    thcy 

lose   all   discretion.      Comp.   i.    637,   and    below,    228. Dnctns   sorte ; 

though  pricst  of  Apollo,  Laocoon  was  appoiuted  by  lot  to  offcr  sacrificcs 
to  Ncptunc,  whose  favor  had  been  forfcited  by  tlic  Trojans  in  conse- 
quencc  of  the  trcachery  of  their  formcr  king,  Laomedon.     Scc  below,  GIO. 

202.  Solcmues ;  used  propcrly  of  the  sacrifice  itself,  but  appliod  here,* 

as  not  unfrequently,  to  the  placc  whcre  the  sacrifice  is  made,  thc  sacrificial 

or  ritual  altar. 203.  Ecce.     Sce  on  57. Ccmlnl ;  for  duo.  with  tho 

additional  idca  of  rcscmblance  iu  size,  appcaranco,  and  niolion.  Comp.  i. 
-02. A  Tcnpdo.     Thc  .>erpenls  conic  fioni  Tencdos.,  ns  nn  omcu  that  ihe 


BOOK    SECOND.  377 

army  of  Ihe  Greeks  is  coming  from  thence  to  the  destruction  of  Troy. • 

Per  alta  (wiffria) ;  along  thc  c/eejo;  join  with  incumbunt. 201.  IlHniensis 

orbibns ;  o/,  or  with  cnormous  folds ;  an  ablative  of  description,  limiting 

anffues.     Gr.  §  211,  R.  6 ;  Z.  §  471. 205.  Incnmbnnt  pplago ;  translate 

in  connection  with  per  cdta:  swim  along  the  tranqull  vmtcrs  ■prcssing  ujpon 
the  sea.     For  the  force  of  incumbcre.,  and  the  case  following  it,  see  on  i.  84. 

Paritcr  \  side  hg  side,  or  with  an  equal  course. ^Tendant ;  supply  cwsum., 

as  in  i.   205. 206.    AlTCCta  5    strctchcd  or  straining ;  not  the  same  aa 

erecta. 20T.  Sangnineae ;  hloody ;  of  the  color  of  blood. Pars  cctcra ; 

all  except  the  head  and  breast. Pontnni  pone  legit ;  courses  the  sea  he- 

hind. 208.     Comp.   iii.    127. Sinnatqnc ;    in   connection   with   legit 

translate  as  a  present  participle,  sinuans,  ctirving.     Comp.  224. Volnmi- 

ne ;  for  the  plural ;  infolds;  meaning  the  undulating  curvcs  made  by  the 

long  bodies  of  the  serpents,  in  propelling  themselves  over  the  waves. 

209.  Spnmante  salo  ;   ablative  of  the  instrumcnt ;  by  the  foaming  sea.     In 

some  editions  it  is  punctuated  as  an  ablative  absolute. Arva;  the  shores. 

210.  Ocnlos ;  the  Greek  accusative  after  sufccti.     See  on  i.  228. 

312.  Visn  eisangnes  ;  terrified  hy  the  sight. igniine  ccrto  ;  in  an  undevi- 

ating  course;  indicating  that  they  had  been  sent  by  a  higher  power  express- 
ly  to  destroy  Laocoon,  and  were  not  merely  seeking  for  prey.     Agmen  is 

also  used  of  the  motion  of  a  snake  in  v.   90. 215.  Morsn  depascitnr; 

devours;    de  is  hitensive. 216.  Post ;    adverbially  for  postea. Ipsam 

refers  to  Laocoon. Snbcnntem  ;  going  up  to  their  aid.     Auxilio  is  a  da- 

tive  of  the  end  or  purpose  under  Gr.  §  227,  R.  2  ;  Z.  §  422. ^218.  Mediam*. 

supply  eum  ;  around  his  hody ;  literally,  him  middle.     See  Gr.  §  205,  R.  17. 

Collo ;  around  his  necJc.     For  the  dative,  see  Gr.  §  249,  R.  3  ;.  Z.  §  418. 

219.    Snpcrant;   rise  ahove  him. Capitc ;   for  capitihus ;  with  their 

heads.     Comp.  volumine,  208,  and  similar  instances  of  the  singular  for  the 

plural  in  i.  579;  vii.  892;  ix.  721;  x.  334. Cervicibns  altis ;  with  their 

necks  {strctched  on)  high. 221.  Vittas  ;  Greek  accusative  ;  see  on  i.  228. 

223.  Qnalcs  mngitns ;  (such)  belloicings  as  the  bull  raises  when  he  has 

fied,  dc.  Taurus  in  prose  would  stand  in  the  principal  clause,  thus :  quales 
mugitus  taurus  tolUt.  Tales,  agreeing  with  clamores,  is  understood  as  the 
antecedent  0?  quales.  Comp.  i.  316,  and  430.  Determine  the  tcnse  oifugit 
by  scanning  the  verse.  If  Virgil  was  familiar  with  the  famous  statue  of 
Laocoon,  now  preserved  in  the  Vatican,  he  chose  rather,  with  true  poetic 
taste,  to  transfer  the  spirit  of  that  great  work  to  his  description,  than  to  ad- 
here  to  the  original  in  respect  to  all  its  details.  In  the  poet's  picture  we 
have  the  old  man  alone  in  the  folds  of  the  serpents,  the  boys  having  been 

previously    dcstroyed. 225.  At ;  in   transition.     Comp.  i.   267. 22C. 

SaCYae ;  cruel;  not  as  an  attribute,  bul;  in  a  restricted  sense ;    angry  with 

the  Trojans. Tritonidis.     See  on  171. ArcCffi  ;  for  templum  ;  it  waa 

Bituated  on  the  highest  part  of  the  Acropolis. 227.  Snb  pedibns.     The 

etatues  of  Mincrva  ans  drapcd  to  thc  foet,  and  some  of  them,  as  the  Mincrva 


378 


NOTES    ON    THE    AEKEID. 


Mcdica  in  thc  Vatican,  liavc  a  snakc  coiled  at  thc  fect ;  and  in  some,  as  thB 
Minerva  Salutifera,  also  in  the  Yatican,  thcrc  arc  two  scrpcnts  rcprescnled. 


Laocoon. 
No  doubt  many  of  the  concoptions  of  thc  poct  wcre  caught  from  Grecian 
statues,  mullitudcs  of  wliich  wcrc  in  liis  time  to  bc  secn  in  Italy.     The 
Ktatue  hcre  fancied  by  Virgil  to  bc  in  the  temple  is  not  of  coursc  the  Palhi- 
dium,  but  some  large  statuc  of  thc  goddoss,  forming  a  conspicnous  orna- 

ment  of  the  edificc. 228^  229.  Kovns  paror;  9icw  terror;  no  longcr  ap- 

pr°hension  for  our  personal  sufoty,  as  in  '21'J,  but  fear  of  thc  goddcss  who 
has  sciit  such  a  terrible  tokcn  of  lior  wrath  upon  Laocoon,  nnd  thus  shown 

tlio  danger  of  cominitting  any  outrago  upon  tlie  woodon  horsc fanitis; 

for  the  dative,  sec  T.r.  §  211,  R.  5,  (1);  Z.  g  WB,  (n). Insliiuat :  .-^upply 

Mf. SfClas  expondlv^O  ;  for  scclrrix  pocnam  solvissf;  (o  harc  pnid  Ihc  pcn- 


BOOK    SECOND.  379 

alty  of  his  crime.     Comp.  i.  258. 231.  Laeserit ;  for  the  mode,  denoting 

the  ground  of  their  opinion,  see  on  i.  388. Tergo,  for  corpori. 232. 

Ad  scdes;  to  the  shrine;  divue  understood. 233.  Condaniant ;  cxclaim 

with  one  voice. 234.     We  divide  the  tvalls  and  throio  open  the  hidwarks  of 

the  city.  Muros  is  the  general  term  for  vmlls ;  moenia.,  city  walls,  foriifica- 
tions,  and,  sometimes,  the  wliole  mass  of  buildiugs  which  malie  up  the  city ; 
the  city.  The  Trojans  are  here  supposed  to  throw  down  that  part  of  the 
wall  which  forms  the  top  and  sides  of  the  Scaean  gate.  Comp.  242,  wherc 
the  term  portae  would  seem  to  indicate  that  the  horse  was  earricd   iu 

through  one  of  the  gates  of  Troy. 235.  Accingant ;  supply  se;  apply 

ihemselves.     Comp.  i.  210. Rotarnm  lapsns ;  the  movements  of  wheels ; 

for  the  simple  form  rotas.    Comp.  i.  301 ;  remigio  alarum. 236.  Stnppea. 

Gr.  §  128,  i.  1. Collo;  about  the  neck ;  dative.     Comp.  iv.  506. 237. 

Scandit;  climbs  or  surmounts ;  a  bold  expression,  suggested  by  the  form 
and  height  of  the  fabric,  and  by  the  difScuIties  to  be  overcome  in  clearing  a 
passage  through  the  fortification.s.     We  must  conceive,  too,  of  the  ascent  to 

the  elevated  ground  on  which  the  wall  is  built. 238.  Armis  for  armatis, 

as  i.  506.     For  the  ablat.  see  Gr.  §  250,  2,  (1);  Z.  §  402. 239.  Sacra  ca- 

nnnt.     Hymns  were  sung  at  the  sacrcd  festivals  of  the  Eomans  by  choirs  of 

boys  and  girls. 240.  Snblt ;  eniers. Mcdiae  nrbi ;  into  the  midst  of 

the  city.  "  Omnia  media  dicuntur,  quae  post  initia  sunt."  Therefore  any 
point  within  the  city  walls  is  media  urhs.     See  on  i.  505.      Urhi  is  governed 

by  illabitur. Minans ;  toweritig ;  as  in  i.  102;  iv.  88. 242.  Diirdani- 

dnm  ;  for  Dardaiiidarum.     See  on  i.  565. Portae  ;  some  understand  the 

gate  of  the  citadel  here ;  but  in  that  case  we  should  expect  some  limiting 
noun,  or  something  in  the  context  to  show  that  such  was  the  meaning. 

243.  Substitit ;  halted.    Stumbling  at  the  door  was  considered  an  evil  omen. 

Utero  ;  the  ablative  of  situation.     The  shock  of  the  sudden  halt  caused 

the  wcapons  of  the  Greeks  secreted  within  the  horse  to  clash  and  rattle. 

244.  Instamns.     Comp.  i.  423,  and  below,  491. Immemores;  regardless 

of  the  evil  omen. Caeci ;  blinded  to  the  circumstances  which  should  have 

awakened  suspicion,  especially  to  the  noise  of  the  arms  from  within  the 
horse.     Sistere  is  foUowed  by  the  accusative  with  in,  or  by  the  ablative 

either  with  or  without  in.     Comp.  x,  323. 246.  Tnnc  etiam  etc;  th£7i 

also,  (as  well  as  very  often  before,)  C^ssandra  opens  her  lipsfor  (revealing) 
ihe  fuiure  fates.  Fatis  iaihe  dalive  a,ii(iv  aperit ;  perhaps  caneudis  is  un- 
derstood.  Cassandra  was  a  daughter  of  Priam,  whom  Apollo  had  inspired 
with  prophetic  power,  whilc  at  the  same  time  in  revenge  for  her  disregard 
of  his  lovc,  he  so  influenced  the  mitids  of  her  countrymen  that  they  gave  no 

heed  to  her  warnings. Crcdita ;  used  personally,  agreeing  with  Cassan- 

dra.  The  poets  occasionally,  in  imitation  of  the  Greek,  use  neuter  verbs  in 
the  passive  voice  with  a  personal  subject.  The  regular  construction  hero 
would  be  cui  nunquam  crcdituni  est ;  so  credor,  invideor,  &c.  For  the 
dat'^'e    Teucris  instead  of  a  Teua-is,  see   on   iiUi,   i.  440. 248.  Esset ; 


380  NOTES   ON    THE    AENEiD. 

the  relative  clause  is  in  tlic  subjunctivc,  under  Gr.  §  264,  8 ;  Z.  §  555,  at 

giving  the  reason  why  they  should  be  callcd  miseri. 249f  Volamas»     See 

ou  i.  417. 

250-437.  Whilo  fhe  city  ie  buricd  in  Blumbcr,  thu  Grccian  flcct  rctunis  silcntly  from 
thc  islanJ  of  Tcncdos,  aiid  Sinon,  secing  the  signal  torch  on  board  tho  ship  of  Aga- 
meninon,  opcns  the  ■woodeu  horse.  The  lcadcrs  iesuo  forth,  and  commcnee  the  attack 
on  the  city,  Bctting  fire  to  it  in  various  places,  with  the  aid  of  Sinon,  and  are  soon 
joincd  by  their  wholo  arniy  at  tho  Scacan  gate.  AcncaB  is  warned  of  the  danger  in  a 
drcam,  by  tbe  shade  of  Ucetor,  and  is  rouscd  from  pleep  by  the  incrcasing  noisc  of  Ihe 
confliet,  and  of  thc  flamcs.  IIc  arms  bimsclf,  and  bastcns  from  t)ie  palace  of  his 
father,  and,  being  joincd  by  Coroebus  and  othcr  warriors,  undcrtakes  to  dcfcnd  tho 
city.  After  a  momentary  succcbs  his  party  is  dcfcatcd,  Coroebus  and  otherB  are  slain, 
and  ho  1b  left  with  only  two  companions,  witli  whom  he  procceds  to  the  palace  of 
Priam. 

250.  Yertitnr.     The  sky  itself  is  conccivcd  to  revolve,  while  tlie  eartb 

stands  still. Rnlt  oceano;  ascendxfrom  the  ocean;  i.  e.  Xight  rises  in  her 

chariot  froin  thc  eastcrn  occan,  when  the  sun  sinks  in  the  west.     See  on  8 ; 

comp.  V.  721 ;  and  for  this  sense  oiruit,  vi.  539;  viii.  369. 251.  Poinm; 

the  heavens. 252.  MYrmidonnm  ;  by  synccdochc  for  Graiorum.     Sce  on 

7.     For  the  incrcment,  sce  Gr.  §  287,  exc.  in  o,  3. Dolos  refers  especially 

to  the  stratagcm  of  the  wooden  horse. Per  moenia  ;  tlirougliout  the  city ; 

not  hcrc  the  battlcracnta  mcrcly. 253.  Sopor ;    a   deep,   heavy  eleep; 

such  as  is  produced  by  a  narcotic.     Comp.  265. 254.  Phalanx  ;  here  for 

host  OT  army. Instrnctis  navibus;  their  ships  heing  drawn  up  in  order; 

not  bein<j/  equipped.  They  would  advance  in  regular  array,  in  order  to  be 
ready  for  an  cncmy,  and  to  effcct  a  simultaneous  landing.  The  equal  (pari' 
ter)  movcment  of  the  serpents  from  Tenedos  to  thc  shore  had  forcshadowed 

this. 255.  Amica — Innae;  the  fricndli/  stHlness  ofthc  tiiffkt ;  fricndh/,  or 

favorable  to  ihe  projects  of  thc  Grccks,  bccausc  while  it  lulls  the  Trojans  to 

rest,  it  lights  the  fleet  on  its  return  to  Troy. Lnnae ;  of  the  moonlight 

night.  According  to  the  post-Homcric  tradition,  Troy  was  taken  at  the 
time  of  full  moon.     Wc  should  infcr  from  340,  360,  397,  420,  &c.,  that  the 

moou  was  somctimes  shining,  and  sonietiincs  obscurcd. 256.  Nota  ;  irell 

known  ;  for  the  Grecks  had  been  ten  years  cncamped  upon  thc  shorcs. 
Flammas ;  a  blazing  torch  is  elevated  on  board  thc  ship  of  Agamcmnon,  as 
tlic  signal  agrecd  upon  with  Sinon,  who  is  now  nt  libcrty  in  thc  city,  and 

unobservcd  by  the  slumbering  Trojans. 257.    Extnlerat ;    had  already 

shown  the  signal  ftame. Dcfensns.     Sinon  had  becn  favorcd  bi/  the  fates 

of  the  (/oJ."!,  unfriendly  {ini<juis)  to  Troy ;  espceiar.y  by  tlie  prodigy  of  the 
two  scrpenti^,  sent  by  Minerva,  who  thus  seeined  to  sanction  liis  faisehood. 

258.    Itcro  ;    for  thc  casc,  comp.   19,  and  45. 259.   Lnxat.     Thia 

verb  in  ailapted  to  both  objects,  Danaos  and  claustra,  by  zcugwa :  rc/cases 
the  Grceks,  and  looscns  the  bolts.  Gr.  §  323,  b,  (2);  Z.  §  775.  Thc  natural 
«irdcr  of  the  ideas  is  also  reverscd.  This  licensc,  which  is  tcrmcd  hi/steron 
protvron,  is  dcfincd  in  Gr.  g  323,  4,  (2). Slnon  ;  the  final  syllablc  is  long. 


BOOK    SECOND.  381 

Comp.  329 ;  see  Gr.  §  299,  2,  exc.  2. 260.  Se  promnat ;  for  prodeunt. 

Robore.     See  on  Italiam,  i.  2.     The  mention  of  some  of  the  lcadcrs  iii- 

dividually,  in  the  order  iu  which  thcy  happcn  to  occiir  to  the  memory  of  tlie 

narrator,  servcs  to  enliven  the  story. 261.  Dirns  5  the  acairscd. Bc- 

mlssnm  pcr  fanem ;  over  {or  along)  a  rope  let  down. 263.  Pelldes  Scoit- 

tolcmns ;  Ncoptolemus,  or  Pyrrhus,  the  son  of  Achilles  and  Diadamia,  and 
grandson  of  Peleus.     He  came  to  Troy  at  the  end  of  the  war,  and  was  con- 

spicuous  in  the  final  attack  on  the  city. PrimuSi     This  should  probablv 

be  undcrstood  litcrally,  and  theu  would  only  show  that  the  speakcr,  in  n;cn- 
tioning  the  names  rapidly,  was  rcmindcd  at  the  moment  when  tbis  cr.c 
occurred,  that  he  was  said  to  have  issued  first  from  the  liorsc.  Pcrbaps, 
however,  it  means  among  tlie  jirst.     Machaon  was  cclebrated  among  the 

Greeks  for  his  medical  skill.    II.  i.  514. 264.  Doli  fal)ric.ltor  ;  builder  of 

the  treacherous  fabric.     He  was  directed  by  Mincrva.     See  15. 265.  In- 

vadnnt ;  they  attack  the  city  while  they  are  desceuding  from  the  citadol  to 

the  Scaean  gate  to  meet  the  army. Sepnltam.     Comp.  253,  iii.  C30,  vi. 

424. 266.  Portls  ;  ablative  of  the  route.     See  on  187. Omncs  sccios  ; 

all  their  companions ;  i.  e.  those  v.ho  have  just  landed  from  the  ships. 

267.  Conscia ;  confederate ;  conscia  implics  that  those  already  in  the  city, 
and  those  just  arrived  have  a  mutual  understanding  of  the  plan  of  attack. 

268.     Comp.  iv.  522. Aegris;  wn/iajspj/ ;  sorrow-ladeu  ;  said  of  men, 

as  compared  with  the  gods. 269.  Dono  diynm  ;  by  the  beneficc.nce  of  the 

gods ;  ablative,  cause  of  serpit. 2T0.  In  somnis  ;  in  slumber.    Comp.  302. 

Aeneas  is  repeatedly  favored  with  warnings  by  visious  and  drcams. Uec- 

tor ;  one  of  the  sons  of  Priam,  and  the  chief  defender  of  Troy,  slain  by  Acliil- 
les,  and  dragged  thrice  round  the  walls  of  the  city,  or,  according  to  nonier, 

thrice  daily  round  the  tomb  of  Patroclus.     See  on  i.  483. 271.  Largos 

fletns;  afood  oftears.   Comp.  i.  465. 272.  Baptatns  bigis,  nt  qncndam  ; 

appearing  asformerly  after  being  dragged  by  the  chariot.  Aeneas  had  seen 
;,he  corpse  of  Hector  in  this  condition,  after  it  had  been  brought  back  to 
Froy  by  Priam.     The  ghosts  of  the  slain  are  conceived  to  appear  like  thcir 

disfigured  aud  mutilated  bodies.     See  vi.  494. 273.  Per — tnmcntcs  ;  for 

'.oris  per  pedes  tumentes  trajectis. Lora ;  the  Greek  accusative,  used  with 

somewhat  more  boldness  than  usual,  as  it  is  applied  not  to  a  part  of  the 
person,  as  in  i.  589,  nor  even  to  the  drcss,  as  i.  320.  Grammarians  differ  as 
to  the  explanation  of  these  accusatives,  but  it  seems  most  philosophical  to 
refer  them  all  to  the  same  general  principle,  namely,  the  accvjsative  denot- 
ing  the  especial  object  to  which  the  preceding  participle  or  adjective  relates. 
The  ordinary  Greek  accusative  here  would  have  hceu  pedes,  accompanied  by 

loris  in  the  ablative :  pierced  as  to  his  feet  with  thongs. 274.  Hei  mibi. 

Gr.  §  228,  3. Qnalis  refers  to  the  appearance  of  Hector's  person. 

275.  Redit.     The  present  in  vivid  narration.    Gr.  §  145,  3. Exnrias  ;  the 

spoils ;  those,  namely,  which  had  been  taken  from  the  body  of  Patroclus, 
whom  Hector  had  slain  in  battle,  and  who  had  worn  thc  armor  of  his  fricnd, 


382 


NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 


Achilles.     Hence  they  are  called  hcrc  "  thc  spoils  of  Achillcs."     For  the  ac 
cusativc,  sce  Gr.  §  234,  R.  1 ;  Z.  §  458,  3d  paragraph.^— 2TG.  Jafolatas 
havinff  hiirled,  or  a/ter  he  had  hurled.     The  attacli  on  the  Greciau  ships, 
hcrc  alludcd  to,  is  dcscribed  in  II.  xv.  392  sq.     Jaculari  takcs  eitlier  the 
accusative  of  the  objeet  thrown  or  that  of  thc  object  thrown  at.     Comp. 

Hor.  0.   1,  2,  3:  jaculatus  arces. Pappibns  *,  vpo7i  the  ships ;    dativc. 

The  ships  were  drawn  up  from  the  watcr,  with  the  sterns  towards  tho  laiid, 
and  surrounded  on  the  hmd  side  b^-  fortifications. 2T8.  Qaae  plarima. 


Hector. 
See  on  i.  419.     The  wounds  are  those  wantonly  inflicted  on  the  dead  body 
of  Hector  by  the  Greeks,  (see  II.  xxii.  3G9-375,)  and  the  mutilations  re- 

ceived  when  it  was  dragged  round  the  walls  by  the  chariot  of  Achilles. 

lltro ;  at  once,  or  spontaneousli/ ;  witliout  waiting  to  be  first  spoken  to  by 

tlie   ghost;  join    thc   advcrb  with  compellare. Flcus  ipse ;  mi/self  also 

u-ccplng ;  as  well  as  he. 282.  Morac.     In  his   drcam  Aencas  docs  not 

rcalize  that  Hector  is  dcad,  but  fancies  tliat  he  has  bccn  long  abscnt,  and 

anxiously  waited  for. 283.  Exspectatc ;  vocative  by  attraction  for  the 

nominative.     Sce  Arnold's  Lat.  Pr.  278;  Z.  §  492. Ct ;  interrogatively  ; 

how?     It  is  usually  joiiicd  herc  with  aspicimu.t,  but  Wagner  makes  it  quali- 

{y  de/essi. 280.  Focdavit;  has  disfigured. 28T.  Nihll ;  tlie  objoct  of 

respondit  undcrstood. Xec — moralnr  ;  nor  rcgards  my  uselcss  inquiries  ; 

lilerally,  me  inquiring  uscle.^s  things. 289.  Ilcu  fagc.    Comp.  iii.  44.—— 

290.  A  cnlmine  ;  /rom  the  s-ummit ;  from  top  to  bottom  ;  hke  thc  Homoric 
/car'  &KpT)<!,  11.  xiii.  772.     Comp.  bclow,  6n3.     Some  editions  rcad  alto  in- 

slcad  of  alta. 291.  Sat — datnm ;  cnough  has  hcen  given;  i.  c.  cnough 

has  bccn  donc  by  thee,  Acncas,  for  thc  couutry  and  Ibr  Piiam.  So  Ileyne 
interprets.  Pcrliaps,  howcvcr,  the  true  scnsc  is,  enough  hcis  been  given  bti 
Ihe/ates  :  the  dcstinics  of  Priam  aiid  of  Troy  are  satisficd,  fulfiUcd.     So  sal 


BOOK    SECOND.  383 

fatisVenerlque  daium  ;  ix.  135. 292.  Hac  ;  with  tkis  ;  with  miue.     For 

the  subjunctive  imperf.  and  plup.  after  sz,  see  Gr.  §  261,  1 ;  Z.  §  524. 

293.  Sacra  ;  supplyswa;  her  sacred  things  and  her  household  gods.  A  limit- 
ing  word  pertainiug  equally  to  two  substantives  is  sometimes  cxpressed  only 
with  the  last.  Comp.  surgentem,  i.  366.  The  penaies  of  Troy  are  those 
which  pertain  to  the  whole  state  in  common,  as  distinguished  from  those  of 

individual  families. 29-1.  Comitcs ;   as  companions ;   in  apposition  with 

/(05. nis  ;    dative. Moenia  ;  for  urhem. 295.     The  order  is :  qua» 

magna,  ponto  pererrato,  denique  statues.  Comp.  iii.  159.  Rome  is  the 
great  city  referred  to ;  for  Aeneas,  in  establishing  the  dynasty  in  Italy 
which  ultimately  built  Rome,  is  the  virtual  fouudLT  of  Eome  itself. 296, 

297.  The  vision  seons  to  bring  the  small  figure  of  Yesta,  (as  one  of  the 
penates,)  the  fiUets,  and  other  things  which  pertained  to  her  worship,  from 
ihe  penetralia,  or  sanctuary  of  the  house  ;  thus  indicating  that  Aeneas  will 
soou  be  called  upon  to  take  charge  of  this  and  the  other  penates  of  Troy. 

298.  Moenia;  the  city. Miseentor;  are  confused.     Comp.  i.  124,  iv.  160. 

Diverso  Inctu ;  with  various  sounds  of  woe ;   or,  according  to  Hcyne, 

with  sounds  of  woe  from  various  quarters.     Comp.  xii.  620. 299,  300. 

Secreta — recessit;  stood  apart  and  solitarij ;  the  house  of  Anchises  was  re- 
mote  from  the  Scaean  gate,  where  the  enemy  were  chiefly  assembled,  and 
was  also  solitary,  or  without  neighboring  houses.     Recessit,  as  refugit,  iii. 

536,  denotes  here  situatiou  without  motion. 302.  Excntior  somuo  ;  I  am 

rousedfrom  sleep. 303.  Arrcctis  anribns.    Comp.  i.  152,  ii.  206. 304. 

Veluti  qnnm  ;  as  the  shepherd  is  ignorant  {inscius)  of  the  remote  cause  of 
the  devastation  around  him,  so  Aeneas,  at  first  stupefied  by  what  he  hears 
and  sees,  does  not  comprehend  the  origin  and  nature  of  the  uproar.    Comp. 

X.  405,  xii.  521. Fnrentibns  Anstris ;  ablative  absolute  :  while  the  winds 

are  raging.     Austris,  for  winds  in  general,  as  in  i.  536. 305.  Rapidos 

montano  flnmiue  ;  (made)  impetuous  by  the  mountain  flood;  the  ablative  is 

the  cause  of  rapidu-s,  which  is  equivalent  to  qui  factus  est  rapidus. 306. 

Bonm  laborcs  ;  by  metonymy  for  segetes. 30T.  Inscins  ;  ignorant  (of  the 

cause.) 308.  Accipiens  ;  hearing. 309.  Fides  ;  the  truth,  ov  the  fact ; 

namely,  that  the  Greeks  had  got  possession  of  the  city;  sofides  is  used,  iii. 

375,  and  Livy,  vi.  13. 310.  Deipliobi.     Dciphobus  was  one  of  the  sons 

of  Priam.     His  death  is  described  in  vi.  509  sq. 311.  Vnkano  ;  for  fire. 

See  on  i.   215. ^Proximns;    next  to  the  house  of  Deiphobus. 312. 

Ucalcgon ;    a  bold  metonymy  for  the  hou^e  of  Ucalegon.     Comp.  iii.  275. 

Ucalegon  is  mentioned  as  one  of  the  Trojan  princes  in  the  Hiad,  iii.  148. 

Sigea  freta ;  the  Sigean  loaters,  or  hay ;  so  called  from  Sigeum,  now  Jenis- 
cheer,  ov  Yenischehr,  a  promontory  at  the  mouth  of  the  Dardanelles,  about 

five  miles  northwest  of  Troy. 313.  Clamorqne  clangorqae.     Comp.  i.  87. 

The  tuba,  though  mentioned  here,  wns  not  invented  uutil  long  after  the  he- 

roic  age. Nec  sat  Fationis  (est  mihi ;)  nor  have  I  enough  of  dcliberation  • 

i.  e.  Ihave  not  a  clear  purpose  in  (scizing)  arms ;  not  considering  what  is  to 


384  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

be  donc  or  gained  bj-  figliting.     For  tlie  genit.  sec  Gr.  §  212,  R.  4.^ 315. 

Belio ;  dativc  for  ad  bellum.     Comp.  iii.  540. 315>  Areem ;  the  citadel. 

Aiiimi ;  tlic  plural  of  animus  usually  dcnotes  powerlul  eniotion. 

317.  Pnlfhrum ;  tlic  predicate  accu.sative  aftcr  C5.se  understood,  whicli  lia.s 
mori  for  its  suhjcct :  to  die  is  glorious.     Gr.  §  205,  R.  8,  and  §  269,  R.  2  ; 

Z.  §597. Snccurrit ;  for  tlie  morc  usual  occurrit ;  it  comes  to  my  mlnd, 

that,  &c. ;  in  tlie  midst  of  thc  excitcnicnt  I  have  ouc  thouglit  only,  nanioiy, 

that  it  is  glorioits  to  die  in  arms. 318.  Ecec.     Comp.  203. Panthns  ; 

mentioned  in  thc  15tli  Book  of  the  Iliad.  The  Greck  form  of  thc  word  is 
Tlo.vboos,  H6.vbovs,  hcnce  the  Lat.  voc.  Panthu  from  tlie  Greck  ■ku.v^ou,     Sce 

Gr.  §  54,  5 ;  Z.  §  52,  2. ircis  Plioebiqne  ;  pricst  of  thc  citadel  only  so 

far  as  he  was  pricst  of  Apollo,  whosc  teinplc,  like  those  of  the  othcr  tutclary 

gods,  'was  on  the  citadcl. 320.  Sacra  doosqne.     Comp.  above,  293. 

Victos;  as  in  i.  G8. 321.  Cursu  tcudit ;  liastens ;  literally, //oWs  (his  way) 

xcith  running. Limina ;    (niy)   threshold;    the   house    of  Anchises  and 

Aeneas.     The  arrival  of  Panthus  with  the  sacrcd  things  accords  with  the 

words  of  Hector's  ghost :  Troy  commits  to  thee  her  gods.     See  293. 

322.  Rcs  snmma  ;  the  puhlic  welfare  ;  our  common  cause ;  in  what  condition 
is  the  chief  intercst  ?     Some  understand:  at  what  point  is  the  principal  con- 

fict  going   on?      Forbiger   prefers    thc    former   intcrpretation. Qnam 

prendimns  arcem  ?  ^vhat  stronghold  do  we  (pv  are  xce  to)  scize  ?  Since  you, 
Pauthus,  have  fled  from  thc  citadcl  itsclf,  what  stronghold  is  still  reniaining 
in  our  hands,  or,  for  us  to  lay  hold  of  for  dcfencc?  This  appcars  to  be  the 
most  reasonable  intcrpretation  aniong  the  many  which  have  bcen  proposed 

for  this  doubtful  passage. Prendimns,  for  prcndemus.     "  The  prescnt  is 

sometimcs  used  for  the  future — when  onc  asks  onesclf  what  must  bc  done 

or  thought  on  the  instant."     Madvig,  §  339,  obs.  2. 321.  Snjuma ;  fnal. 

325.  Fnlmas — fuit ;  we  have  been  Trojans,  Ilium  has  bcen.     This  is  aa 

emphatic  way  of  saying,  we  have  ceascd  to  be  Trojans,  Ilium  no  longer  exisfs. 

See  Gr.  §  259,  R.  1,  (2),  (a). 32G.  Ferns ;  unpitt/ijig. 32J).  Sinon. 

See  on  259. Miscet ;  scatlers  all  around. 330.  Insnltans  expresses  the 

joy  Sinon  feels  in  the  succcss  of  his  stratagcm,  as  well  as  his  contempt  for 

thc  victims  of  it. Alii ;  othcrs ;  opposcd  to  tliat  portion  of  the  Grecks 

who  have  desccnded  from  the  hor.^e. Bipiitculibns  iiortis  ;  at  the  open 

gates ;  more  fully  translatcd :  al.  the  gafes  having  thcir  doublc  doors  thrown 

open.     Comp.  266. 331.  Millia  qnot;  supply  the  antccedent  tot,  the  sub- 

iect  of  adsunt  undcrstood :  so  many  thousands  arc  prcsent  as,  <i'c.     See  on 

i.  430. Mycenls.     Gr.   §  255;  Z.  §  398. 332.  Alli;  ofhcrs;  anothcr 

portion  of  the  samc  countless  host  mcant  by  thc  first  alii,  thc  greater 
part  of  whom  are  still  at  the  gatc,  while  sorao  of  thcir  numbcr,  the 
Bccond  alii,  havc   alrcady   pcnctratcd  into  the  strccts  of  the  city.     Thia 

is  Wagner'8  explanation. An^nsta  viarnm  ;   for  angustas  vias ;  the  nar' 

row  passagca.     Scc  on  i.  422;    Gr.  i$  212,  R.  3 ;  n.  4 ;  Z.  g  435. 333. 

Oppositi;    opposed,   that   is,   to  the    Trojaiis  who   attcinpt   to   cscapc. 


BOOK    SECOND. 


385 


Acnoas  rushing  to  battlo 


386  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

334.  Stat  stricta;  a  lively  cxprcssion  for  est  stricta;  suggesting  the  erect 

position  of  tlic  blado. Mucrone  cornsco;  an  ablativc  of  manner  limit- 

ing  stat. Prlmi ;  thosc  wlio  are  foremost,  or  ncarcst  to  thc  gate,  and 

who   arc   thc   first  to  attcuipt   resistance. 335.    Cacco    Marte;    in  the 

furious  conflct.     Cacco  is  not  herc   darl,  or  noclurnal,  for  the  sccnc  is 

lightcd   up  by  the   conflagration,   and   it   is   mooiiHght. 336.    iXnmlne 

divnm;  bif  the  divine  impulse;  not  by  liis  own  dclibcratc  purpose,  for  hc 

had  not  sat  rationis  in  armis. 33T.  Tristls  Erinys;  thc  dark  fury ;  the 

gloomy  spirit  of  conflict. 339.  Addnut  sc  SOCios ;  join  me  as  comradcs. 

Comp.  vi.  778.     The  names  here  given  are  invcntcd  by  Virgil. 341. 

Agglomcrant;  supply  se;   gather  around. Nostro ;  for  ?Heo,  as  in  139. 

Coroebns ;  tlic  son  of  Mygdon,  a  Phrygian  king,   dcscribed  by  post- 

nomeric  pocts  as  the  acccptcd  suitor  of  thc  mad  Cassandra,  and  slain  either 

by  Diomedcs  or  Neoptolcmus. 343.  Insano  ;  passionatc,  ardent ;  a  com- 

mon  signification  of  the  word ;  thoupjh  some  refer  it  here  to  the  hopcless- 

ncss  of  liis  love  ;  frantic  love. 344.  Gcner  ;  as  a  (futurc)  son-in-law. 

315.  Fnrentis;  prophetic.     See  on  24G. 346.  Andierit;  subjunctivc  un- 

der  the  same  principle  as  above,  248. 347.  Qnos  nbi  Tldi ;  and  when  I saio 

them.     Gr.  §  280,  iii.  1 ;  Z.  §  803. Andcrc  ;  venturing  upon.     Gr.  §  272, 

R.  5. 348.  Snpcr;  iov  insuper,  moreover ;  as  in  i.  29.     The  connection 

seems  to  be  this :  bcsidcs  the  enthusiasm  thcy  alrcady  manifest,  I  scck  to 

cnkindle  more,  and  so  hcgin  urith  these  word^i. His  is  regardcd  by  Thiel  as 

an  ablative  of  manner ;  corap.  talibns,  i.  559 ;  by  Forbiger  and  others  as  a 

dative  for  ad  hos. 349.  Pcctora ;  as  animi,  144,  for  pcrsons. Andcn- 

tem ;  supply  me. Si  vobis— est.     The  protasis  is  in  the  indicative,  since 

there  is  no  unccrtainty,  and  the  apodosis,  moriamur  and  riiamus  are  for  the 

imperative.     Sce  Arnold's  Lat.   Prosc,  435,  foot-notc  g. Extrcma ;  de- 

slruction  ;  extreme  perils. 350.  Certa  cnpido  ;   a  fixcd  dcsire ;  implying 

both  desire  and  resolve. ^Scqni.     For  the  inf  depending  on  ctipida  e&t 

vobis,  sce  note  on  10. Sit.     Gr.  §  205 ;  Z.  §  552.      What  is  the  state  of 

(lit.  to)  our  fortunes. 351.  Excessere.     Tiie  aneicnts  bclicved  that  the 

capture  of  a  city  or  country  was  prcccded  by  tlic  dcparturc  of  its  tute- 
lary  gods.  Thus  Horace,  0.  1:  Juno  et  deorum  quisquis  aynicior  Afris 
inulta  cc.s.'<crat  impotcns  tcllure.      Adgtis ;    ablalive  absolute  with  relictis. 

352.  Qnlbns;  through  whoin ;  ablative  of  means.     Gr.  §  247,  R.  4;  Z. 

g  455. Steterat ;  had"flourishcd.    Comp.  v.  56,  i.  208. 353.  Moflamnr 

— rnamns.  "  Lct  us  die,  and  (to  tliat  end)  rush  into  the  jnidst  of  the  cuemg.'' 
Ladcwig.     Othcrs  takc  it  for  a  striking  examplc  of  the  hgstcron  protcron. 

Gr.  §  323,  4,  (2).    Comp.  iii.  002. 351.  rnil  salns  ;  predicate  nominative : 

to  hope  for  no  safcly  is  thc  onhj  safcli/  of  the  conqucred. 350.  Raplores. 

Bce  Gr.  §  205,  K.  ii.  ;  comp.  i.  21. 351.  Exegit;  has  drivcn  forth ;  i.  c. 

from  thcir  dcn-s. C.ictos ;  hlind;   i.  o.  to  all  danger. 350.  Mcdlae. 

Bee  on  218. 360.  Nox  atra.     Tlie  moon  is  at  timcs  obscurod  ;  as  wa 

learn  from  397,  420,  and  021. Cava  nmbra.     Comp.  i.  510,  v.  810,  ix. 


BOOK    SECOND,  387 

671,  X.  GSG. 361,  362.  Fando  explicet.    Comp.  G,  7. Labores?  ca- 

la?nifies. 364,  365.  Perqne — Perqne.     Sce  on  i.  18.     The  repetition  of 

the  preposition  gives  eniphasis. laertia  ;  lifeless ;  rcferring  to  the  corpses 

of  the  shiin.  Others,  witli  Heyne  and  Thiel,  refer  it  to  the  helpless  bodies 
of  old  men,  women,  and  cliildren,  and  persons  unfit  for  war.  Observe  the 
climax  in  vias,  domos,  deorinn  limina,  throughout  the  streets,  dwcllings,  tem- 

plcs. Poenas  dant  sangninc;  suffcr  punisJancnt  with  Uood ;  s%iff'er  dcafh. 

Comp.  72. 367.  Qnondam ;  sometimes.     Comp.  41G,  vii.   G39,  xii.  8G3. 

369.  Ubiqnc;  everywhere.     Z.  §  288. Pavor.     Gr.  §  309,  E.  1,  (1). 

PlnriQta  iniago  ;  vcry  many  an  imagc  ;  moaning  many  a  repetition  of 

death,  innumerable  corpses,  representations  of  death,   everywhere  seen ; 

thus  Ovid,  Met.  10,  726,  repetitaque  morlis  imago. 371.  AndrogCOS  ;  An- 

drogeus,  a  Grecian  hero,  not  mentioned  in  Ilomer. Credcns;  supposing ; 

supply  nos  esse. 372.  Ultro ;  at  once,first ;  as  in  279  ;  without  being  first 

addrcssed. 376,  3T7.   Fida  rcsponsa;  reliable  answcrs. Sensit  delap- 

BUS',  having  fallen  he  perccivcd  (iV);  a  Greeli  idiom  {ov  sensit  se  dclapsum 

esse.     G.  §  271,  n.  3;    Z.  §  612,  at  the  end;  Klihner  §  310,  3. 378. 

Retro  rcpressit;  withdrew  or  checkcd.     Comp.  169. 379.  VeiHfi,  etc. ;  a 

comparison  derived  from  the  Iliad,  iii.  33  sqq. ispris ;  for  asperis. 

380.  Hnmi  nitcns ;  walking  o»  (or  along)  the  ground.     Gr.  §  221,.  R.  3,  (1); 

Z.  §  400,  2d  paragraph. 380,  381.   Refngit  attollcntein  iras;  has  fled 

back  from  him,  throwing  his  angry  head  upward;  "throwing  his  neck  up- 

ward  threatening  wrath."     Thiel.     Iras  is  equivalent  to  iratum  caput. 

Coila.    Greek  acc. Et  densis  ctc. ;  and  we  surround  them  with  our  serried 

arms ;  the  dative  iis  is  uuderstood;  we  are  poured  about  {to)  thcm.     Gr. 

§  249,  R.  3 ;  Z.  §  418. quc  connccts  the  verbs  circumfundimur  and  ster- 

nimus. 385.  Labori ;  conflict;  like  iroVos  in  Homcr. 386.  Snccessa — 

aniniisqnc ;  cxulting  idth  success  and  with  ardor ;  both  are  ablatives  of 
caiise  ;  both  success  and  boldncss  of  spirit  make  the  youth  exult.  In  like 
nianner  confidence  of  spirit  is  assigned  as  a  cause  of  exsultare,  in  v.  398. 

Ilence  it  is  unnccessary  to  suppose  any  zeugma  here. 387.  (Jna.    Comp. 

i.  401. 388.  Ostendit  se  dextra;  for  ostendit  se  dextram;  shoivs  herself 

favorable  ;    de.ttra,  adjectively,  agrecing  with  fortuna. 389.    lusignia ; 

martial  ornaments ;  the  arms  by  which  the  Greeks  were  distinguished  from 
the  Trojans ;  especially  thcir  helmets  and  shields,  with  their  peculiar  devices. 

390.  Dolns  ;  supply  sit. Reqnirat ;  a  question  of  appeal.     See  on  S. 

391.  Dcinde.    Sce  on  i.  195. 393,393.  Insigne  deforani  indnitur; 

pnts  071  flic  beautiful  dcvicc.  Shields  were  often  adorned  with  raised  work 
lu  bronze,  representing  sometimes  a  thundcrbolt,  or  some  formidable  ani- 
uial,  or,  as  on  the  shield  of  Achilles,  scenes  from  life  and  histoiy.  For  the 
acc.  instead  of  thc  ablat.  after  induitur,  see  Gr.  §  234,  R.  1 ;  Z.  §  4.58,  3d 

paragraph. 394.    Rhipcas ;    dissyllable.     See  on  i.  521. 39;,'.    Jlond 

uuniiae  uostro  ;  not  under  a  fauorable  divinity  ;  literally,  not  unJer  our  owa 
divinity.     A^oslcr  and  the  othor  posscssivcs  somctimcs  havc  thc  forcc  of  st- 


388  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

cundus,  propiliotis.  Comp.  v.  832 :  /erunt  sna  flamina  classem.  Tliiel  re- 
fcrs  this,  and  parallel  exprcssions  in  thc  ablative,  to  Z.  §  472,  the  ablativua 
modi.  Corap.  iii.  17,  iv.  103,  iv.  340;  also  Hor.  0.  3,  6,  1 :  Troja  rcnascens 
lugubri  alite  ;  1,  15,  5;  mala  avi ;  Cic.  in  Catil.  1,  13:  hisce  ominibus — iis- 

deiii   aujipiciis. 401.  f  ondantnr  ;    for  se   condunt.     Comp.   24. Alvo. 

See  on  01. 102.  Mliil  fas  (est);  for  non  licet.     Fat  is  what  accords  with 

thc  dccrecs  of  the  gods.     For  nihil,  as  an  eniphatic  non,  sce  Gr.  §  277,  R. 

2,(b);  Z.  §  G77. Qncnqnam.     Gr.  §  207,  R.  31 ;  Z.  §  709,  17.     Trans- 

late  thc  passage :  It  is  not  right  that  any  one  shoidd  be  confldent,  whcn  the 
godn  are  opposcd.  Divis  is  in  the  ablat.  abs.,  and  not  governed  by  fidere, 
■which  is  uscd  here  absolutely,  or  without  a  casc  following.  Thc  sentiraent 
is  intended  to  introduce  the  incident  which  immediately  follows,  and  which 

turns  the  tide  of  success  against  the  Trojans. 103.  Passis  crinibns.     Cas- 

sandra  was  a  prophetess,  iuspircd  with  the  divinc  frenzy ;  hence  the  di- 
shcvelled  hair,  as  in  thc  dcscription  of  the  prophetcss  at  Cumae,  vi.  48 :  non 

comtae  mansere  comae. Priameia ;  daughtcr  of  Priam ;  from  the  Greelc 

form  Ufitauifios.    Gr.  §  283,  exc.  6,  (3) 404.  A  templo  Mincrvac  ;  she  had 

Hed  to  the  shrinc  of  Mincrva  for  rcfugc. Advtis ;  from  the  inncr  sanciuary. 

This  was  thc  occasion  of  the  outrage  refcrrcd  to  in  i.  41,  which  provokcd 

the  wrath  of  Minerva  against  Ajax  Oilciis. 407.  Spcciem  ;  spcctaclc. 

Coroebns.    Sce  341  sqq. Furiata  mente  ;  ablat.  aljsol. 108.  Peritnrns. 

Gr.  §  274,  R.  6 ;  Z.  §  0'39. 409.  Densis  armis ;  ablat.  of  nianner,  as  in 

383.     lis,  (*•  hofitibus,  in  the  dat.,  is  undcrstood  aftcr  incurrimus. 410. 

Delnbri  CDlniine.     A  party  of  Trojans  was  hurling  down  missiles  from  the 

top  of  thc  teniple  of  Minerva. 411.  Obrnimnr ;  for  the  quantity  of  the 

last  syllable  liere,  sce  on  pavor,  369. 412.    Armornm  facie,  etc. ;    on 

account  of  the  appearance  of  our  arms,  and  the  midake  arising  from  our 

Orecian  crests ;  sofacies  is  used  in  v.  768. 413.  Ercptac  virginis  ;  at  tfie 

rescue  of  the  virgin ;  a  causal  genitivc,  lilic  jubarum,  212 ;  Gr.  §  211,  R.  1. 

For  the  use  of  the  participle  scc  Gr.  §  274,  R.  5 ;  Z.  §  637 114.  Acerri- 

mns.     Ajax  was  cxasporated  by  tbc  loss  of  Cassandra,  whom  hc  had  .'^cized 

as  his  pcculiar  captivc. 415.  Dolopuni.     See  on  7. 116.  Adversi ;  op- 

poscd  to  cach  othcr. ^nondam  ;  as  in  367. Turblue  rupto  ;  a  whirl- 

witid  having  bursl ;  not  an  ablativc  of  manncr. 417.     Conip.  i.  85,  86. 

418.  Equis;  Hmiting  laetus.     Comp.  tegminc,  i.  275.     The  winds  are 

Bomctimes  dcscribed  as  riding  on  horses;  as  Eurip.  Phoen.  2,  18:  Zefvpo^ 

iirirfvffas;  Ilor.  0.  4,  4,  44:  Eurus  per  Siculas  eqnitat  undas. 419.  Spn* 

mens  Xerens ;  the  foaming  Kcrcus.  Nercus  (dissyllablc)  was  an  ancient 
Mca-god,  son  of  Tontus,  to  whom  tho  tridcnt  and  the  doniinion  of  the  sca 

are  sonictimes  attributcd,   as  hcrc. Imo  fnndo.     Comp.  i.  84  and  126. 

. 120.  Sl  qnos;  ior  fjuostumquc. IVr  unibram.     Comp.  397. 421t 

|n>Idils ;  by  our  stralagcms.     Scc  387, Irbe.     Gr.  §  254,  R.  2,  b. 

122.  Prlml ;  the  forcmost ;  tho^e  who  now  camc  ncar  cnough  to  cxaminc 
Uf   morc  closcly. Meutlt» ;  uscd   hcrc  passivdy;  wc   may  translatc  it^ 


BOOK    SECOND.  389 

counterfeit,  or  assmned.     Gr.  §  162,  17;  Z.  §  032,     Mentitos  is  also  under- 

stood  with  clipeos. Agaoscnut ;  they  recognize ;  tliey  perceive  that  our 

arms  and  shields  are  theirs,  though  worn  by  enemies. i23a  Ora  sono 

diseordia  Signaut ;  they  point  out  (to  each  other)  our  speech,  differing  (from 
theirs)  in  sound.  Ora  is  put  for  speech,  or  dialect ;  sono  refers  to  pronunci- 
ation,  or  accent,  in  which  alone  Virgil  supposes  the  language  of  the  Trojaiis 

to  have  differed  from  that  of  the  Greeks. 424.  Ilicet ;  instantly,  ihere- 

upon;  so  in  poets  of  the  golden  age.    Thiel  takes  signare  here  as  equivalent 

to  declarare,  indicare. 425.  Penelei ;  scanned  Pe-ne-l^-i,  [U-r^viXews ;)  Gr. 

§  86.     Peneleus  hcre  is  au  imaginary  personage. Dextra.     Comp.  i.  98. 

Armipoteutis.     See  on  <Ze^wiri,  410. Ad  aram  ;  near  Ihe  altar ;  the 

great  altar  stood  at  the  foot  of  the  steps  in  front  of  the  Vlpuvaos,  not  within 

the  temple  itself. 426.  Tnns  ;  eraphatic,  as  in  i.  15. 42T.  Aeqni.     Gr. 

§  213,  R.  1,  (2);  Z.  §  438. 42S.  Dis  aliter  visnm  ;  it  scemcd  othcrwise  to 

the  gods ;  he  deserved  to  live,  but  the  gods  willed  it  diffcrently.     The  good 

and  evil  are  alike  subject  to  accident  and  death.    Comp.  below,  430. 429. 

Sociis;  by  their  friends  on  the  summit  of  the  temple,  who  are  ignorant  of 

their  real  character.     See  410. Pantlin.     See  318,  320. 430.  Infnia  ; 

the  fillet  of  the  priest  is  put  by  metonymy  for  the  sacred  office  itself. 

431.  Flamma  mcornm(civi?m).  Aeneas  speaks  as  if  burning  Troy  were  a 
great  funeral  pile,  in  which  his  slain  countrymen  had  been  consumed. 

432.  Vestro  may  be  referred  both  to  Troy,  implied  in  Iliaci,  and  to  meoruin. 

433.  Vices   Dananm  ;   ^jere7s  fro7n,  attacks  made  by,    the  Greeks. 

Vitaiisse ;  the  subject,  rne,  is  omitted,  as  not  unfrequentl y,  where  the  pro- 
nouu  is  easily  suggested  by  the  foregoing  words.     Comp.  iii.  184,  201,  603, 

iv.  493,  vi.  457. Fata  fnissent  contains  the  notion  o£  decreeing,  command- 

ing ;  hence  the  followiug  subjunctive  with  ut.     Gr.  §  273,  2  ;  Z.  §  620. 

434.  Miinn  ;  6y  m^  Aanc?,- by  my  bold  deeds.  Translate  the  passage :  if  the 
fates  had  decrecd  fhat  I  should  fall,  I  deserved  (death)  by  my  prowess. 

435.  Iphitns  et  Pclias  mecnm ;  supply  divelluntur ;  are  separated  from  the 

rest  ivith  me. 436.  Qnornm ;  a  partitive  genitive,  after  a  proper  name 

used  partitively.     Conip.  i.  71.     A  substantive  sometimes  supplies  the  place 

of  a  partitive.     Ramshorn,  §  105,  c;  Madvig,  §  284,  obs.  2. Aevo  gravi- 

cr  ;  somewhat  cnfcehled  by  age ;  the  comparative  according  to  Gr.  §  122,  R. 

3  ;  Z.  §  104,  1,  u. Vnluere  Flixi ;  thc  wound  of  that  is,  given  by,  Ulysses. 

Gr.  §  211,  R.  2,  (a).     For  this  form  of  the  genitive,  see  on  i,  30.' 437. 

Ciamore ;  hy  the  shonting ;  Aeneas  is  now  attracted  by  the  noise  of  battle  to 
the  paluce  of  Priam,  on  the  Acropolis. 

438-55S.  On  reaclriiig  thc  Acropolis,  Aer.eas  finds  the  great  boJy  of  the  Greeks,  led 
oii  by  Pyrrlius,  making  a  furioua  assault  on  the  f)-ont  of  the  palace  of  Priam.  He 
cftecta  an  cntrance  by  a  private  postern  gate,  and,  ascending  to  tlic  roof  and  battle- 
ments,  aids  tlie  defcnders  in  hurling  dowu  missiles,  and  masses  of  tbe  building  nia*e- 
rial,  on  tlie  assallants.  From  tbe  battlements  he  sees  the  Greeks  under  Pyrrhus 
ftnally  burst  tl  roiigh  the  principal  gate,  and  rusb  into  the  interior  of  the  palace.     Ile 


390 


NOTES    ON    TIIE    AENEID. 


BCfS  ryiriiHB  s!;iy  rolitcs,  a  »on  of  Priani,  al  tlic  feet  of  bis  fiitlior,  iukI  rriain  liinieel/ 
after  :i  fccblo  rcKistance,  Klain  by  Pyrrbns  iicar  tbo  fainily  altar. 

438t  Cen,  in  tlie  sense  of  «s  if,  is  followed  by  thc  subjunctive ;  Gr.  §  JCS, 

2,  (1);  as  if  the  other  battlcs  icere  nowhcre  raginrj  ;  i.  e.  as  if  all  tlie  fighting 

wcrc  conccntratotl  licre. Belh»  =/)roe/ia;  a  poctic  usc  of  thc  word. 

440i  Sic  is  cxplanatory  of  the  forcgoing  ^vords,  and  qualifics  indo.nilum, 

rucntcs,  and  obsessTim  ;  sofurious,  rushing  so,  and  so  closeli/  besel. Mar- 

tcm ;  confict ;  as  in  335.     For  thc  participle  after  ccrnimus,  fce  Gr.  g  '27-1, 

3,  (c) ;  Z.  §  636.  The  Greeks  are  makiug  an  attack  on  the  front  of  tlic 
pahice  in  two  divisions ;  one  party  is  attcmpting,  by  moans  of  scaling- 
ladders,  to  rcach  the  roofs  of  the  buildings,  (442-444;)  anothcr,  hoadcd  by 
Pyrrhus,  is  storniing  thc  palace  gate,  under  cover  of  thcir  shields,  which 
thoyjoin  together  abovc  their  heads,  by  lapping  one  shield  ovcr  another, 
like  the  tiles  or  shinglcs  of  a  roof ;  thus  forming  a  tcstudo,  under  the  shoher 
of  which  tliey  are  safe  from  tlie  niissilos  hurled  down  npon  them  by  thc 
dcfendcrs.     The  Trojans  are  vigorously  dcfending  tlic  palace,  partly  in  thc 

vcstibule  and  court  within  thc  gatc,  partly  on  the  walls  and  roofs. 441. 

Acta  tesludinc ;  a  testudo  Jtaving  hcen  advanccd.  Agcrc  is  more  properly 
said  of  hcavy  mihtary  engiucs,  movcd  upon  roUcrs;  but  hcrc,as  in  ix.5no, 
of  the  testudo  formed  by  shields,  the  soldiers  who  form  it  advancing  in  a 

compact  body  to  the  point  of  attack. Limen ;  thc  gate. 142.  Ilac- 

rent ;  the  laddcrs  terminate  at  the  upper  end  in  hooks. Parietibus ;  tl»e 

ablative;  on  thc  walls  ;  the  sidcs  of  the  palace,  not  mocnia,  city  walls.     On 

the  pronuncialion  of  the  word  here,  paryetibus,  see  note  on  abicte,  10. 

Snb;  up  to.     For  its  position,  sce  Gr.  §  279,  10,  (f). 443.  Kitnntnr; 

theg  climb ;  rcfciViiig  to  the  assailants. Gradibns ;  on  the  stcps  (of  the 

laddors.) Art  tohl ;  ugainst  the  missiles  ;  i.  c.  of  the  Trojans  on  the  walls. 

Joiu  sinisirls  with  objiciunt ;  theg  present  their  shields  with  ilicir  lcft  hands. 


Au  .'ittack  uiion  a  fortlflcd  palacc. 

445,  IIG.  Tecla  (ulnilnu;  thc  cwcrcd  summits;  thc  wholc  roufing,  iu- 

chuliii,.;  also  thc  gihlcd  raftcrs,  auratas  trabes,  underncath  tho  tilcs. His 


BOOK    SECOND. 


391 


— -telis ;  with  such  wcapons  as  these. 446.  Ultima  ;  ihe  end  of  things;  when 

they  see  that  things  have  come  to  the  last  extremity. 447.    Extrema 


Attack  npon  an  ancient  citadel. 

in  morte ;  in  the  last  deadly  stritfjgle.  Thiel  quotes  from  Horace,  Catullus, 
and  Propertius,  similar  espressions,  denoting  the  last  nioments,  tlie  verge  of 

death;  -ds,  supremo  Jine,7Jiorte  supre7na,extreinorogo. 449.  Alii.  These  are 

Trojans  in  the  vestibule  and  court  of  the  palace,  standing  in  dense  ranks, 
with  drawn  swords,  ready  to  raaintain  the  cntrance  against  the  Greeks,  if 

the  door  (/o)-es)  shall  be  forccd. ^451.  Iiistanrati  animi ;  our  spirits  were 

rekindled;  referring  both  to  himself  and  to  his  two  companions.     The  in- 

finitives  here  are  poetic  for  the  gerund  with  ad. 453.  Limea  crat,  etc. 

This  passage  scrves  to  explain  how  Aeneas  and  his  comrades  made  their  way 
into  the  palace  by  a  back  entrance,  while  the  host  of  Greeks  was  swarming 
round  the  front  walls  and  the  principal  entrance.  Limen,  fores,  and  postcs, 
all  refer  to  this  private  entrance  in  the  rear,  {relicti  a  tcrgo,)  secret,  or  un- 
known  to  strangers.  "Within  this  back  gate  were  corridors,  affording  an 
easy  communication  {pervius  usus)  of  the  various  buildings  or  parts  of  the 

palace  with  each  othcr,   (inter  se.) 456.  Saepins ;  frequently ;  hke  the 

coraparative  in  436. Se  ferre ;  to  go. lacomitata.     In  a  more  pubhc 

place  the  custom  of  the  Trojans  and  Grceks  would  have  required  the  matron 

to  be  atteuded  by  a  female  servant. 45T.  Socercs ;  Priam  and  Hecuba; 

80  patres,  below,  579. Astyanacta.     Gr.  §  86.     Astyanax,  or  Scamandri' 

us,  the  son  of  Hector  and  Andromache,  was  of  about  the  same  age  as  Asca- 
nius,  and  in  the  sack  of  Troy  was  captured  by  the  Grceks  and  hurled  frwn 
the  battlcments  of  the  city,  that  the  prophccy  might  not  be  fulfilled  Yhich 

Baid  that  he  should  restore  the  kingdom. Evado  ;  I  make  my  ivay ;  by 

the  private  passage  just  described. 458.   Ad  snmmi  fiistigia  calmiuis ; 

literally,  to  the  piinnaclcs  of  the  top  of  the  roof    Comp.  302. 459.    Comp. 

447. 460.  Turrim ;  acc.  after  aggressi,  having  assailed;   see  on  I,  312. 

Suca  a  watch-tower  in  Troy,  but  not  on  Priam's  palace,  is  scveral  times 
mentioncd  in  the  Hiad;  as,  H.  iii.  13  sq. ;  xxi.  526  sq. la  praecipite ;  on 


392  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

the  rerffe  {of:  tlie  roof.) IGD,  4G1.  Snmmls.edactam  tectls ;  reared  from 

the  top  of  thc  roof;  i.  c.  from  tlie  palacc  roof. 4G3,  464.  Qna  samma 

labantCS  tabnlata,  etc. ;  icherc  the  highest  stories  affordcd  yielding  joints. 
Does  "the  highcst  story"  hcre  signify  that  of  the  tower,  or  ihe  suinmit  of 
the  palace  itsclf  ?  Dr.  Ilenry  undcrstands  it  to  be  the  latter,  and  it  is  difli- 
cult  to  conccivc  why  the  Trojans  should  loosen  the  highest  story  of  the 
towcr.  Thcir  object  was  to  tcar  the  towcr  from  the  roof  of  thc  palace, 
{altis  sedibus,  si(7}wiis  iectis,)  and  Virgil  probably  means  that  the  joinings  at 
that  point  were  separatcd.  Thc  summa  tahulata,  or  highest  flooring  of  the 
palace,  was  thc  base  of  the  towcr,  and  if  thc  towcr  was  of  wood,  it  could  be 
easily  Ihrown  down  in  one  mass,  wbcn  looscned  and  scparated  from  the 

summit  of  the  palace. 464,  465.  Altls  sedlbns ; /*wi  its  loftii  founda- 

tions ;  from  tl>e  terracc,  or  top  of  the  palace  walls. 466i  Agmina.     Sco 

on  super,  i.  680. 468.  lutcrea  rcfers  to  thc  time  occupied  in  tcaring  up 

thc  tower,  and  in  the  replacing  of  the  Grceks  dcstroyed  by  its  fall. 469. 

Vcstibnlnm  ;  the  cutrance  of  the  palace. Pyrrlms.     Sce  on  Neoptolcnms, 

2G3. 470.  Exsultat ;    springs  to  and  fro ;   the  word  5s  substituted  for 

pugnat,  to  indicate  thc  swift  movements  of  the  warrior,  as  he  strovc  to  beat 

down  the  palacc  gate. Lnce  ahena  ;  with  thc  gleanm^g  of  brass ;  lit.  with 

bronze  light.     The  shield,  hclmct^  corsclet,   and  greaves  were  of  burnishcd 

metal. 471.  Qaalis  ubi ;  such  as  the  sna7:e  u-hen,  etc.     Comp.  iv.  143, 

I,    592  ;    faUs,    qualis  cst  coluber,  uM,  etc. In  Inccm ;  throws  his  sJeek 

coils  into  the  light  of  daxj ;  sub  tei-ra  is  contrastcd  with  in  lucem. Tnmi- 

dnm  ;  he  is  supposcd  to  bc  swollen  by  eating  vcnomous  herbs. 473. 

Positis  exnviis  ;  his  old  covering  being  laid  aside.     Ponere  is  oftcn  uscd  for 

dcponere. ^475.  Ardims  Jld  solem  ;  rising  erect  tou-ards  the  s^m  ;  contrasted 

with  frigida  bruma.     The   description  of  the  snake  is  copied  from  G.  iii. 

426,  437,  439. 476.  Ingens.     Comp.  i.  99. Periplias.     Thc  name,  but 

not  tbc  person,  is  borrowed  from  the  Iliad,  v.  843. 477.  Antomedon, 

(Gr.  §  299,  2,  ex.  2 ;)  oftcn  mcntioned  in  the  Iliad  as  the  chariotccr  of 
Achiiles.     Aftcr  thc  death  of  his  commandcr,  hc  followcd  the  fortunes  of 

Neoptolcmus,  or  Pyrrhus. Scjria  pnbcs ;  thc  Scyrian  band ;  followcrs 

of  Pyrrhus,  from   thc  island  of  Scyros,  (now  Skyro,)  onc  of  the  Cychides, 

which  was  ruled  over  by  Lyconicdes,  thc  grandfathcr  of  Pyrrlius. 478. 

Sncccdont  tedo ;  advance  to  the  palacc.  Thcy  hurl  lircbrands  up  to  the 
battlomcnts  to  prevcnt  the  Trojans  from  casting  down  missilcs  on  Pyrrhua 

and  the  other  assailants. 479.  Ilise ;   Pijrrhus.     Prove  the  quantity  of 

tlic  fimal  a  in  correpta  and  dura. 480.  Llmina ;  for  the  whole  door. 

Perrnnipit,  vcllit ;  he  strives  to  break  through  and  tear  away.  Thc  present 
ocre  dcnotes  tlic  continuance  of  the  act,  or  thc  attcmpt  to  brcak,  and  wrench^ 

not  the  coniplction  of  the  act. Pcstes  ;  iov  forcs.     Thc  door  or  gate.     By 

postcs  is  mcant  stiictly  thc  upright  timbcrs  which  formcd  the  axes  of  tha 

doublc  doors. (,'ardine  mcans  hcrc  thc  holcs  in  the  lintcl  and  threshold, 

In  which  the  pivots  at  thc  top  and  bottoin  of  thc  door  turned. 481. 


BOOK    SECOND,  393 

ieratos;  bron.-e,  covered  with  bronze.     Comp.  i.  4-18,  449. 482.  Dcdit ; 

made. Ore  limlts  fe^iestra^n ;  Gr.  §  211,  R.  6;  7nade  an  opening  with  a 

broad  month. 483.  ipparet.     Through  this  opening  the  great  central 

apartments  of  the  palace  are  at  once  visible  to  the  GreeliS ;  for  the  vestibule 
admitted  directly  to  the  open  courts,  which  were  connected  by  porticoes,  so 

that  the  eye  could  range  through  the  whole  at  one  view. 485.  Armatos ; 

the  armed  men  guarding  the  vestibule,  mentioned  in  449,  450. Yldent ; 

the  Greeks  see. 487.  Carae  acdes ;  the  court,  or  hollow  square,  around 

whicli  the  other  apartments  were  built,  was  often  called  cavaedium. 491. 

Instat  vi  patrla  ;  presses  on  with  his  father^s  fury  ;  with  the  impetuosity  in- 
herited  from  his  father,  the  wrathful  Achilles ;  whom  Horace  describcs  as 

impiger,  iracundus,  ine.i:orabilis,  acer. 492.  Snfferrc ;  to  withsfand  him. 

Ariete ;    pronounced  Aryete.     See  on  16.     The  battering-ram,  in  its 

primitive  form,  is  meant;  that  is,  a  long  stick  of  timber,  borne  and  wielded 

by  men  without  the  aid  of  machinery. Crcbro  arietc ;  as  below,  627 : 

with  frequent  blows  ofthe  ram.  It  is  hardly  probable  that  Virgil  intended 
to  use  the  term  aries  here,  as  Heyne  understands  it,  in  a  figurative  sense. 

493.  f ardinc,  postcs.    See  above,  480.     Join  cardine  with  e)7ioti :  being 

startcd  froin  the  piivot. 494,495.     Thcse  two  verses  express  admirably 

the  suddenness  with  which  the  palace  is  filled  the  instant  the  entrance  has 

been  forced. ^JIilltc  ;  vAth  soldiery ;  a  collective  noun.     Soe  ou  20. 

496.  Aggeribns  rnptis  ;  the  dikcs  being  broken  down.  Tlie  Po  and  the  Tiber 
in  many  places  were  kept  within  their  channels,  like  the  lower  Mississippi  at 
fhe  present  day,  by  embankments ;  and  Virgil  was  familiar  with  the  disas- 

trous  floods  produced  by  a  crevasse,  or  brcach  in  the  dike. 497.  Exiit ; 

has  gone  forth  ;  i.  e.  from  its  channcl. 498.  Cnmnlo  ;  in  a  mass  ;  ablat. 

of  manner,  as  in  i.   105. 499.  Vidl  ipsc ;  /  myself  saw.     Aeneas,  who 

had  been  repelling  the  storming  party  of  Greeks  from  the  battlements,  was 
compelled  to  witness  the  entrance  of  Neoptolemus  and  the  other  assailants 
at  the  gate,  the  destruction  of  the  interior  of  the  palace,  and  the  slaughter 

of  Priam,  without  the  power  to  render  help. 501.  Hecaba  ;  the  wife  of 

Priam. Nnrns  ;  daughters ;  here  both  for  the  daugbters  and  daughters- 

in-Iaw  of  Hecuba. Pcr  aras  ;  for  inter  aras. 504.  Barbarico  ;  barbar- 

ic ;  because  the  gold  and  spoils  which  adorned  the  door-posts  were  trophies 
formerly  captured  from  forcign  or  barbarian  enemies  of  the  Trojans.  It 
was  customary  to  hang  such  spoils  on  the  door-posts  of  houses,  as  well  as 

temples.     Comp.  v.  393,  vii.  183. 505.  Tcneut ;  as  i.  308;  occupy ;  hold 

all,  where  the  fire  does  not  rage. 506.  Fnciint.     Gr.  §  265 ;  Z.  §  552. 

The  fatc  of  Priam  has  just  been  indicatcd  in  gcneral  terms ;  but  it  is  natural 

lo  ask  the  particulars  of  his  death. Ueqniras.     Gr.  §  260,  R.  4 ;  Arn. 

Lat.  Prose,  494;  Z.  §  728. 507.  Uti ;  when ;  an  adv.  of  time,  as  ut,  in 

67. 508.  Mcdinm  in  penetralibns  ;  in  the  midst  of  his  sacred  apartmcnts. 

Comp.  i.  348. 509.  Arma  ;    especially  the  lorica,  or  coat  of  mail. — ■ — 

DIu  ;  join  with  dcsucta. Senlor  ;  the  aged  king. 510.  BBmCTis  ;  da. 

17* 


394  NOTES   ON    THE    AENEID. 

tive.     Qt.  S  2-iO,  R.  3  ,  Z.  §  418. Fcrrnm  ;  accusativc,  after  cingitnr,  bj 

a  Greei-i  CQnstruction,  instead  of  the  ablative.     See  on  392.     Litcrally:  he 

is  girde-1  on  as  to  his  sword ;  freely :  lie  girds  on.     Gr.  §  234,  R.  1. 511. 

Fertur ;  is  hcing  borne;  is  hurrying ;  but  be  is  intcrrupted  by  llecuba. 

Pec   525. Moritnrns  ;    destined  to  die  ;    comp.  j^criturus,   408. 512. 

Acdibus  in  mediis  ;  in  thc  midst  of  the  palace  ;  in  the  open  court  of  the  pal- 

ace,  where  werc  the  grcat  altar  and  thc  sacrcd  laurel. \ndo  snb  axo  ;  nn- 

dcr  the  open  vaidt. 514.  Complexa ;  having  cinbraced,  but  not  ccaslng 

to  embrace ;  translate  by  the  present,  embracing.     Sec  Gr.  §  274,  R.  3,  last 

pait. 515.  Ncqnidquam  ;  they  were  gathered  around  the  aHor  in  vain, 

for,  in  the  end,  its  sacredness  failcd  to  save  them. Circnm.    See  on  i.  32. 

516.  Praccipites;   for  se  praecipitantes ;  fiying  dowti  swiftly. 517. 

Ampicxae.     See  on  complexa,  514. Scdebant ;  it  was  the  custom  to  flee 

for  refuge,  in  time  of  peril,  to  the  altars  and  images  of  the  gods.  Imagine 
a  high  altar,  with  a  wide  base,  and  a  flight  of  steps,  ascending  to  the  sum- 
mit,  or  place  of  sacrilicc.  Altaria  apphes  to  an  altar  of  this  Idnd ;  ara  to 
an  altar  of  any  kind.  The  custom  here  alluded  to  is  also  illustratcd  in  the 
Scriptures :   "  And  Joab  flcd  unto  the  tabernaclc  of  the  Lord,  and  caught 

hold  on  the  horns  of  the  altar." 519.  Mens ;  purpose.     Comp.  xii.  554. 

520.  Cingi;  supply  te.    See  on  433. 521.  Auxilio ;  for  the  ablative 

casc,  6ce  Gr.  §  250,  2,  (2) ;  Z.  §  460. Dcfcnsoribns  istis.     Dr.  Henry  ia 

foUowed  by  Forbigcr  and  Ladcwig  in  referring  these  words  to  <efe ;  thus 
the  sense  will  be,  such  defenccs,  i.  e.  such  as  those  weapons  of  tliine.     For 

the  force  of  istis,  sec  Gr.  §  207,  R.  25  ;  Z.  §  127. 522.  Xon  si,  ctc. ;  7iot 

evcn  ifmy  Ilector  were  now  here.     For  not  evcn  Hcctor  would  now  avuil  us 

with  arms ;  it  is  only  the  altar,  and  the  gods,  that  can  save  us. Orc. 

Comp.  i.  Cl4. Sacra  in  sede  ;  on  the  altar,  or  steps  of  the  altar. 521. 

Simul;  withus. 526.     Polites  has  been  defcnding  the  entrance  to  the 

palace,  in  company  with  those  mentioned  in  449.     Pyrrhus,  wlio  has  already 

woundcd  him,  is  on  the  point  of  despatching  him. Pyrrlii  dc  cacdc  ;  from 

the  deadly  blows  of  Pyrrhus. 528.    Porticibns ;    in  the  porticocs ;  the 

ablat.  of  situation.  Ilis  flight  is  through  thc  colonnadcs  which  surround 
the  courts,  and  also  across  the  courts,  which  are  uow  vacua,  because  tlie 
occupants  of  the  palace  are  eithcr  with  Priam  around  the  altar,  or  still  con- 
tending  with  the  Greeks  at  the  entrancc  of  the  first  court.  We  must  con- 
ccivc  of  a  pahicc  composcd  of  scveral  courts,  each  surroundcd  witli  ita 

porticoes  and  rangcs  of  apartmcnts. Lustrat ;  traverses. 520.  Infcsto 

vnlnerc ;  wilh  a  deadly  aim,  or  Ihrust;  join  with  insequitur. 530.  Jam, 

jam  ;  now,  even  now. Piemit ;  is  prcssi^ig  npon  him ;  is  on  thc  point  of 

piercing  liini.     Otliers  translatc,   frami/ixcs  hiin. 533.    In  nifdia  morto 

tcuetnr;  hc  is  he Id  {or  placed)  in  the  midst  of  dcath.  Ilis  sou  lics  belbre 
liim  dcad,  and  liis  own  dcath  impcnds  instantlyi  Ladewig  adopts  tlic  sug- 
gcstion  of  Servius,  referring  morte  to  thc  death  strugglc  of  Politcs  alone : 
he  is  rcslraincd  in  the  dcath  slrvgglc. 535.  At.     This  partide  is  used 


BOOK    SECOND, 


395 


to  denote  a  violent    burst  of   emotion,  iu    connection  with  prayers  and 

imprecutions.     Comp.  viii.  645. Aasis ;  reckless  deeds.     Gr.  §  205,  R.  7, 

2. 536.  Si ;  as  in  i,  603.— — Pietas  5  merci/ ;   ric/!iteoiis  pitt/. £arct  5 

whkh  regards  such  things.    Gr.  §  '26-4,  6 ;  Z.  §  561. 538.  Coram  5  equiTa- 

lent  to  oculls  meis. 3Ic  ccraere  fccisti ;  hast  caused  me  to  scc.     For  the 

prosaic  construction,  fecisti,  ut  cemamy  see  Gr.  §  273,  1,  6 ;  Z,  §  618. 

539.  Foedasti ;  Imst  violated.  It  implies  both  the  outrage  to  his  nature  as  a 
father,  the  defiling  of  his  person  with  the  blood  of  the  slain,  and  the  reUgious 
impurity  caused  by  contact  with  the  dead.  For  the  touch,  or  even  the"pres- 
ence,  of  a  corpse,  rendered  the  individual  religiously  impure.     See  vi.  150. 

510.   Qno.     Gr.   §  246;    Z.   §  451,  2d  paragraph. Mcntiris;   you 

falscly  pretend. 541.  Itt  hostc  ;  m  respect  to  his  enemy. Jnra  fidcm- 

qne  snpplicis.  A  suppliant  had  a  right,  by  the  laws  of  Jupiter,  to  the  pro- 
tection  of  him  to  whose  faith  he  comniitted  himself :  c^ijus  in  fidem  vcnit. 
When  Priam  went  to  the  tent  of  Achilles  to  beg  the  body  of  Hector,  Achil- 
les  observed  his  rights,  and  the  faith  due  tohim  as  a  suppUant.  So  Forbiger. 
Supplicis,  with  respect  to  jura,  is  a  possessive,  with  resp?ct  to  fidem,  an  ob- 
jective  genitive.     Comp,  i,  462.     Others  understand  fidem  of  the  trust  or 

confidence  placed  in  the  victor  by  the  supphant. 512.  Erabuit ;  respected; 

as  a  transitive  verb.     See  Gr.  §  232,  2;  Z.  §  383. Sepuicro ;  dative  of 

the  end ;  for  sepulture. 543.  Dcctorenm  ;  a  possessive  adjective,  for  the 

genitive  of  the  substantive  Ilectoris.  Such  adjectives  are  quite  frequent  in 
poetry.     See  584,  and  iii.  304.     So  Horace,  0.  3,  3,  28 :  Hectoreis  opibus. 

Regna ;  'palacc. 514.  Seiiior.    Comp.  509. Sine  ictn ;  vAthout  in- 

fiicting  a  wound. 545.  Rcpnlsnai ;  supply  est ;  which  was  instantly  re- 

pjellcd  bythc  resounding  brass. Snmmo  nmbone  ;  from  the  topofthe  boss. 

547.  Rcfcres,  ibis;  as  imperatives.     Gr.  §  267,  R.  2;  Z.  §  586. 

Ergo ;    so  then;   the  particle  here  expressea 

bitter  irony. 548.    Pelidae.     Achilles  was 

the  son  of  Peleus. Degcnercm  ;  a  scornful 

allusion   to   the   coraparison   between  father 

and  son,  j  ust  made  by  Priam,  540  sq. 550. 

Hoc  diceas ;   while  saying  this. Tremen- 

tem ;  trcmbling ;  not  with  fear,  but  with  age. 

See  509. 551.  Lapssntcm.     Gr.  §  1S7,  ii. 

1 ;  Z.  §  231,  1. 5.j2.  fomaai  laeva  impH- 

cait ;     for  comae  lacvam.      Comp.  723, 

Lateri  ;  in  his  sidc;  dative  for  the  more  usual 
coustruction,  in  latus,  or  in  latere.     See  on 

18, 553.    ExtKlit;    raised    on    high. 

Capnlo  tenns ;  ^ip  to  the  hilt ;  for  the  position 

of  tenus,  see  Gr.  §  241,  R,  1, 555.  Sorte 

tnlit ;  according  to  his  destiny  tooTc  him  away. 
Gr.  §  249,  ii, 556.  Popnlls— tcrris ;  trans- 


Priam, 


396  NOTES    ON    TIIE    AENEID. 

late,  whh  Forbiger,  as  an  ablative,  denoting  tlie  cause  of  superbum  ;  thus, 
the  Rovereign  of  Asia  once  proud  of  so  manij  tribcs  and  coimtrics,  (under  his 
sway.)  Thiel  and  others  give  regnatorem  a  vcrbal  power,  and  niake  popnlia 
and  terris  in  thc  dative  after  it :  the  proud  soverciyn  over  so  many,  &c. ;  but 
conip,  604,  and  v.  2G8,  473,  whcre  superbus  is  in  hlie  nianncr  accompanicd 

by  an  ablative  of  causc. 55Ti  AsiaCt     The  westcrn  part  of  Asia  Minor  ia 

mcant. — ■ — 558t  Sine  noniine ;  ■without  a  name ;  because  deprivcd  of  thc 
liead,  that  by  vhich  the  individual  is  distinguished. 

559-631.  Aenoas  is  remindcd  by  the  fate  of  Priam  and  his  house,  of  his  own  father 
Bnd  family,  and  is  hastening  homeward,  -when  he  diBCovers  the  Grccian  Ilelen,  the 
cause  of  all  these  misfortunes,  lurking  in  ono  of  the  temples.  He  stopB,  and  is  on  the 
point  of  taking  vcngeance  by  putting  her  to  death,  but  is  detcrrcd  by  his  molhcr,  \vho 
nppears  to  him  in  hcr  own  form,  and  reveals  to  him  the  gods  at  work  in  the  destruc- 
tion  of  Troy.  Ile  submits  to  fate,  and,  guardcd  by  Venus,  arrivcs  at  his  homc  in 
eafety. 

559.  At.     Scc  on  i.  267. Tnm  primam.     Aeneas  is  now  for  the  first 

tnnc  awakcncd  to  all  thc  horrors  of  his  own  situation,  and  that  of  his  famiiy, 
which,  perhaps,  is  undergoing  all  the  outrage  he  is  now  witncssing  in  the 

palace  of  Priam. 5G1.  AqnaCTnm ;  of  the  same  age ;  i.  e.  as  Anchises. 

562.    Snbiit ;    came  to  my  mind.     Supply  mentem.      Comp.   575. 

Crensa;  the  wife  of  Aencas,  and  daughter  of  Priam. 563.  Domns;  the 

last  syllablc  is  lengthened  here  by  the  ictus.     Gr.   §  309,  R.  1,  (1). 

Casns ;  the  fortune  ;  as  in  i.  623. 564.  Respif io  ;  /  look  aboitt.     Ue  bas 

becn  absorbcd  in  the  scene  in  the  court  bclow,  and  the  dcath  of  Priam. 
Now  he  withdraws  his  eyes  to  considcr  what  is  going  on  around  him  on  the 

battlcments. Sit ;  for  the  mode,  sce  on  506. Quae  COpia  ;  what  num- 

ber,  or  forcc? 566.  Ad  terram,  etc. ;  tliey  have  cast  themsclves  (from  the 

battlcmcnts)  to  the  ground.     The  perfect  defnite  is  uscd  here  with  rcfcroncc 

to   tlie    forcgoiiig   liistorical  present. 567.      The    passagc   Includod    in 

brackcts  is  iiicon.sistent  with  vi.  510-527,  and  is  said  to  have  becn  set  aside 
by  Tucca  and  Varius,  the  critics  to  whom  the  manuscript  of  Virgil  was 
committed  by  Augustus.  llence  they  are  wanting  in  most  of  thc  manu- 
scripts ;  but  they  arc  rcgardcd  as  genuinc  by  tlic  best  rcccnt  commcntators, 

and,  also,  as  not  unworthy  of  the  poet. Adco.     Virgil  often  joins  this 

particle  with  jam.     It  may  be  translatcd,  noio  indccd.     Comp.  v.  268,  864, 

viii.  585,  xi.  275,  487. Snper  nnns  cram  ;  for  supcreram  nnus ;  I u-as  rc- 

maining   alonc. Linilnn  ;    shrine. 568.    Scrvantom  ;    kccping ;    i.    c. 

holding,  as  a  placc  of  rofiigc,  sccurc  on  aocoiint  of  its  saorcdncss. 569. 

Tyndaridn ;  Ihc  daughta-  of  Tyndarus.     llolcn,  the  daughtcr  of  Tyndarus 

and  Leda.     Sce  i.  652. 510.  Errantl ;  to  mc  wandering.     Ile  has  loft  the 

battlcmcnts  of  thc  palacc,  but  is  still  on  the  Acropolis,  and  sccking  to 
fscapc  to  his  own  houso,  without  coniing  in  contact  with  thc  cncmy. 
Hence  lie  pursucs  a  dcvious  cour.-JC,  lookir.g  about  cautiously ;  per  cuncta 

oculos  ferenti. 571.  Eversa  Pergania  ;  the  ovcrthrow of  Troy.     Gr.  §274, 

R.  6;  Z.  §  637. Poenas  Uananm ;  punishment  from  the  Greckx.    Comp. 


BOOK    SECOND. 


397 


Ull^j,^  435. Coujagls  ;  Menelaus. 5T3.  Commuiiis  Erinys  ;  the  common 

fury  \f  Troij  and  of  her  own  country ;  because  she  had  beea  the  cause  of 


Menelaus  puraues  Helen. 
the  ten  years'  war,  which  had  been  attended  with  many  disasters  to  the 

Greeks,  and  was  now  closing  with  the  destruction  of  Troy. 5T4.  Aris 

sedcbat.     Comp.  525. Invisa ;  in  its  hteral  signification ;  unseen,  unno- 

ticcd.     Others  understand  by  it,  odious,  hateful,  both  to  gods  and  men. 

5T5.  Igncs  ;  fury;  the  fires  of  passion. Snbit  ira  ;  the  angry  impulse,  or 

purpo^^se,  enters  my  mind. 5T6.     The  infinitivcs  as  in  10. Stclcratas 

pocnas  ;  for  sceleris  poenas,  or  sceleraiae  poenas  :  the  penalty  of  her  guill,  or 

froni  the  gidlty  one ;    the  forraer  is  preferable.     Comp.  vi.  5G3. 5n.. 

Scilicct ;  forsooth. Mycenas  ;  for  Graedam.     Comp.  i.  650. 5T8.  Tri- 

uuipllO  ;  ablat.  abs.,  with  parto. 5T9.  Coujngiam  ;  for  conjugem.     Comp. 

xi.  270. Patres;  parcnts;   as  soccros,  457. 580.  Plirygiis  ;  Trojan ; 

as  in  68. Comitata.     Comp.  i.  312,  and  note. Ministris.     Gr.  §  248, 

R.  3.  In  the  Odyssey,  books  4th  and  15th,  we  fiud  Helen  reinstated  as 
queen  in  the  palace  of  Menelaus  at  Sparta.  It  should  be  remarked  that  the 
impression  given  by  Virgil  of  Helen  is  widely  different  from  that  which  we 
get  from  the  Iliad  and  Odyssey,  where  she  is  represented  rather  as  the  vic- 

tim  of  misfortune,  than  as  a  deliberate  evil-doer. 581,  582.     The  future 

perfects  anticipate  the  time  when  the  sack  of  Troy  shall  be  looked  back 
upon  as  a  past  event,  and  they  relate  to  the  foregoing  futures,  ibit  and 

vidcbit.     Comp.  iv.  591. 583.    Non  ita ;    it  shall  not  be  thus. 584. 

Fcfflinea ;  possessive;  a  woman^s  punishmcnt;  as  Hcctoreum,  543.  585. 
ExtiuxiSSC.  The  infinitive  here  is  peculiar,  as  it  expresscs  the  cause  of 
laudabor,  which,  in  prose,  would  be  quod  exiinxcrim ;  translate,  1  shall  be 

praiscd  for  having  destroyed  the  wretch. Kefas  ;  for  nefariam  ;  the  ac- 

zurscd  woman. Mcrentis ;  from  (Ut.  of)  her  deserving  it.     Comp.   229. 

588.  Explcssc  ;  more  intensive  than  implesse  ;  to  havefiUed  up,  to  havt 

tatisfied. 58T.  fhricis  flammae  ;  with  avenging  fury ;    literally,  to  havc 

filled  my  mina  of{to  have  made  it  full  of)  vengcful  flame.     The  genitive, 


398  KOTES   ON    TIIE    AEXEID. 

after  a  vcrb  siguifyiug  to  fill.     Gr.  §  220,  3;  comp.  i.  215. Satlasse ;  U 

have  appeascd.     Tbe  niancs  of  Ibe  elain  cannot  be  quiet  in  the  lower  world, 

until  tbey  are  rcvengcd. 58S.  Ferebar.     Comp.  511.     Lit.,  /  was  hcing 

camed  awaij. 590.  Pnra  Incc ;  in  clcar  light ;  not  in  a  cloud,  as  gods 

often  appear. 591.  Confessa ;  for  tbe  prcsent,  as  comitata,  580 ;  mani- 

festlng  hcrself  as  a  goddcss  ;  not  disguised  as  in  i.  314  sq. 592.  Qnanta  ; 

so  grcat  as ;  for  tbc  gods  are  conceivcd  to  be  of  lofty  stature. Preliensnm 

— continnit ;  sujjply  me;  caught  and  held  me.     See  on  i.  69. 595.  Qno- 

nam ;  whithcr.     Tbe  particle  nam,  suffixcd  to  pronouns  and  adverbs,  iudi- 

cates  some  degree  of  astonisbment. Nostri ;  for  (litcrally,  of)  m.s.    Ycnus 

is  represcnted  as  including  bcrself  witb  tbe  faniiiy  of  Aeneas.    Comp.  i.  250. 
For  tbe  diflerence  in  tlic  usage  of  tbe  forms  noslri  and  nostrum,  sec  Gr. 

§  212,  K.  2,  n.  2;  Z.  §  431. 59G.  Vv\n9,\,  first ;  i.  c.  before  you  tbink  of 

slaying  Ilelen. Fbi.      Interrogativc. 597.   — ne  in  prose  would  bc 

joined  to  superct.     The  poets  sometimes  join  thc  enclitics,  que,  ne,  ve,  to 

some  word  after  ihe  first  in  tlie  clause,  or  group,  wbich  tbey  introduce. 

599.  Acies;  battalions. Rcsistat;  Gr.  §  261,  R.  3;  Z.  §  524;  unlcss  my 

care   opposed  (icere   opposing.)      Tbe   prescnt  for  the   imperfect. 600. 

Tnlerint ;  Ilanserit ;   woidd  already  have  iaken  away  and  slairi.     Tbe  pcr- 

fects  supposc  thc  completion  of  tlic  action  at  the  present  timc. 601. 

Tibi ;  join  with  evertit  as  a  dativus  incommodi;  the  idea  is:  noi  the  hatcfut 
bcauty  of  Ilelen,  noi  the  guilty  Paris,  but  the  sevcriiy  of  the  gods,  is  ovcr- 

throicing  this  dominion  for  ihee. 602.  — YC ;    translate  nor.     See  Gr. 

§  198,  ii.  2,  d;  Z.  §  337.     Ntithcr  Ilelcn  nor  Taris  is  tbe  rcal  causc  of  thc 

destructiou  of  Troy. 603.  Opes  ;   might,  potcer. A  enlniine.     Comp. 

290,  and  note. 601.  Adspice.     Ycnus  now  causes  Aeneas  to  sce  all  tbat 

the  gods  sce ;  tlie  grcat  gods  thcmselves,  tbough  invisible  to  men,  arc  at 

work  in  tbe  destruction  of  Troy. 605.  Tibi ;  tlie  dative,  as  tbe  remote 

object  after  hebetat,  instead  of  visus  iuos,  or  gcnit.  tui. llnmida  caligat ; 

gathers  darhly ;  humida  is  vapory,  hcnce  obscure. 606.  Xe  qna  parentis 

JDSSa  time ;  do  not  fear  io  follow  any  commands  of  ihy  mother.     Vov  now 
that  your  cyes  are  opened  to  tbings  invisiblc,  you  may  understand  tliat  her 

counsels  arc  safe. 609.  rndantcm ;  rising  in  waves ;  comp.  viii.   257  ; 

fumus  agit  iindam. Pulvcrc ;  witli,  mingled  dust.     Litcraliy,  dust  bcing 

minglcd.     See  Z.  §  472,  n.  1,  2d  paragrapb. 610.  Xeptnnns.     Neptune 

liad  built  tlic  walls  of  Troy  for  Laomcdon,  tbe  fatlier  of  rriani,  and  was  de- 
frauded  by  tliat  king  of  his  stipulatcd  rcward.     llencc  bis  liostiiity  to  Trov. 

Tridenti;  join  witb  emota.     Comp.  i.  145,  ii.  418. 612.  Scaeas.    Tbc 

Scaean  gate  was  on  ibe  west  side  of  Troy,  looking  towards  tbe  sca.     I^y  tbis 

tlie  Grccians  were  still  pouring  into  tlie  city.     Comp.  330. 613.  Prluia  ; 

foremost ;  in  ihe  van  ;  as  lcadcr  of  tbe  Grccks.     Conip.  Ilor.  0.  3,  3,  63 : 

me  (Snno)  ducente  victrices  catervas. 015.  Jaui.     Comp.  310.     Tiiis  par- 

ticle  sometimes  scrvcs  in  narrative  to  set  oft"  a  .>*tatcmcnt  distinctly  froin  tlie 
forcgoing. Res|t|re.     Comp.  fiO }.     llis  Mtlention  bad  bcon  directcd  tlius 


BOOK    SECOND.  399 

far  by  Venus  to  the  walls  and  the  gate,  where  Neptune  and  Juno  aro  acting ; 
now  he  turns  to  behold  Miuerva,  who  stands  upon  the  battlements  of  the 

citadel. 61 6i  Nimbo  effalgeas  et  Gorgone  siicva ;  hrirjht  vdth  a  clowJ,  and 

with  the  cruel  gorgon.     Both  the  surrounding  cloud,  which  betokens  her 
anger,  and  the  gorgou's  head  on  her  shield,  are  made  luminous  by  the 

flames  of  the  burning  city. 617.  Ipse  pater ;  even  Jupiter,  though  not 

uufriendly  to  the  Trojans,  must  execute  the   decree  of  destiny. 619. 

Eripe  fngam  ;  hasten  your  fligJd  ;  seize  the  opportunity  of  flight,  while  flight 

is  still  possible. Finem  impone  labori;  put  an  end  to  7/our  struggle. 

620.  Limine  ;  for  the  case,  see  on  244. 621.  Dixcrat ;  for  this  usage  of 

the  plup.  see  Gr.  §  259,  R.  1,  (3). 622.  Dirac  facJCS  ;  fcarful  forms;  the 

gods,  now  made  visible  to  Aeneas,  and  eserting  their  powers  against  Troy. 

62i.  Tnm  TCro ;  then  indeed;  when  my  eyes  were  thus  opcned. 

Visnm  {est);  was  seen. 625.  BTeptnnia.     Troy  is  thus  callcd  because  Nep 

tune  constructed  its  walls. 626.  Ac  veluti  qnnm  ;  even  as  when.     Comp, 

i.  148,  iv.  402.     Thiel  thinks  that  no  apodosis  need  bc  supplicd  in  such  sen 

tences,  ac  having  the  force  of  atque  adeo. 627.  Ferro  bipeniiibnsqne 

hendiadys  for  ferreis  bipennibus ;   iron  axcs.     See  on  i.  61. ^Accisam 

which  they  have  begiin  to  cut  (Uterally,  being  cut  upon)  with  iron,  and  frc' 

quent  blows  of  the  axe. Instant;  with  inf.,  as  i.  423  ;  strive  to  overthrow. 

628.  Miaatnr;  threatens  tofall. 629.  Comam;  leaf-crown  ;  the  foli' 

age  of  trecs  is  often  called  coma.     Comp.  G.  ii.  368,  iv.  137;  Hor.  0.  1,  21, 

5,     The  accusative  after  tremefacta  is  to  be  explained  Yikeoculos,  i.  228. 

Vertice  ;  join  with  nutat  as  an  ablative  of  manner. 630.  Snpremnni ;  for 

ihe  last  time ;  adverb'ally.     Comp.  iii.  68;  see  Gr.  §  192,  4,  (b);  Z.  §  26*7. 

632-746.  Anchises  at  first  refuses  to  joia  Aeneas  in  his  flight,  but  yields  at  last  to 
the  signs  and  warnings  sent  by  Jupiter.  While  they  are  making  their  way  out  of  the 
city,  Creiisa,  the  wife  of  Aeneas,  is  separated  from  her  comjianioas  and  lost ;  hnt  she 
is  not  missed  until  they  rcach  the  place  of  rendezvous,  outside  of  the  gate. 

632.   Desccndo.     Aeneas   descends  from  the  Acropolis  to  his  father's 

palace.     He  had  already  left  the  palace  of  Priam.     See  570. Dncente 

deo ;  the  divine  one  (Venus)  guiding.     Comp.  620.     Deo,  like  dcus,  (Alecto,) 

in   vii.  498,  is  here   generic,  as  6,  t),   9e6<!. 633.    Expedior,  recedunt. 

Aeneas,  by  the  divine  agency  of  his  mother,  is  carried  safely  through  the 

fire  and  the  enemy,  wcapons  and  flanies  moving  aside  from  hini. 634. 

Perveatum  ((?s<  rt  me)=perveni;  I  arrivcd  ut. 635.  Antiqnas.     The  ne- 

ccssity  of  forsaking  his  home  is  the  more  painful,  as  it  has  been  the  abode 
of  a  long  line  of  ancestors.     Ilis  trial  is  also  increased  by  the  unexpccted 

refusal  of  his  fiither  to  accompany  hira. 636.  Primum,  iu  both  instances, 

agrees  with  quem.     Aeneas  must  take  up,  aud  carry,  his  father ;  for  he  had 

been  formerly  disabled  by  a  Etroke  of  lightniug.     See  648,  649. Tollerc 

here  implies  both  to  take  up,  and  carry. 638.  Integer  aevi ;  for  znteger 

aevo;  unixnpaired  in  age.    So  ix.  255,  and  Ilorace,  0.  1,  22,  1 :  iyiteger  vitae; 
Gr  §  213,  a;  Z.  §  437. 639.  Sanguis  and  vircs  are  also  thus  connected 


400  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

in  V.  396. Stant  roborc;  whose  strenrjth  remains  Jirm  in  its  own  vigor , 

nccding  the  aid  of  none ;  for  the  ablat.  see  on  i.  268,  and  above,  88. 

640.  Agltate;  imje  fonvard;  implying  both  planning  and  executing. 

642.  Satis  sapcrqne;  there  is  an  ellipsis  of  est  and  quod ;  it  is  enourjh  and 

morc  that  I  havc  secn,  &c.     The  pl.  as  7ios,  89. rna  nccessarily  Ibllows 

thc  numbcr  o(  excidia,  (Gr.  §  118,  II.  2 ;  Z.  §  115,  note,)  which  is  put  in  the 
plural,  pcrhaps,  to  suggest  all  thc  appalling  circumstanccs  attcnding  the 
dcstruction  of  a  city,  Troy  had  becn  captured  and  sackcd  by  Herculcs, 
during  the  reign  of  Laomcdon ;  Priam  has  survived  that  capture  of  the 
city  by  Ilercules,  and  that  is  enough.     He  does  not  wish  to  outlivc  the 

second  sack  of  Troy,  now  being   made   by  the  Greeks. Snpcrarimns, 

for  superfuimus ;  as  in  597,  and  iii.  S39.     The  dative  is  under  the  gcneral 

rule,  Gr.  223;  Z.  406. 644.  Sic  positnm;    thus,  0  thus,  lying.     He  is 

rcclining  on  a  couch,  in  the  position  of  one  dead,  or  dying.     Comp.  iv. 

681. Affati ;  having  hid  farewell  to  me.     It  was  the  custom,  immcdiatcly 

on  the  deccasc  of  a  Koman,  for  the  nearcst  relative  at  the  bedsidc  to 
call  on  the  dcad  by  name,  aud  utter  three  times  in  a  loud  voicc  the  word 
vale.  Sce  iii.  68,  and  vi.  506.  This  ceremony  was  also  repeatcd  at  the 
funeral  pile,  and  at  the  tonib.     Anchiscs  wishcs  them  to  trcat  him  as  if  al- 

ready  dead,  and  bid  him  farewell. 645.     This  line  haa  caused  rauch  dis- 

cussion.  Manu  is  understood  by  some  to  signify,  ly  my  oion  hand,  that 
\s,  by  suicide;  by  others  the  enemy^s  Aa?ic?,  and  by  others  simYAy  viole7tcc, 
or  a  death  inflicted  by  a  human  hand,  as  opposed  to  a  natural  death.  The 
latter,  which  is  Thiers  intcrpretation,  is  probably  correct.     The  words  may 

be  rcndercd:  as  for  me,  I shall  meet  my  death  by  violence. Miscrebitnr ; 

the  eneniy  tcill  show  compassion  ;  that  is,  thcy  will  put  me  out  of  my  misery, 

by  slaying  me,  while  seeking  to  plundcr  my  house  and  pcrson. 616. 

Facilis  jactara  sepulflni ;  the  loss  of  hurial  is  casy.     This  scntimcnt  is  very 

uiniatural  for  a  Grcck  or  Roman.    Conip.  iv.  620,  vi.  333. 618.  Dcmoror. 

Gr.  §  145,  1,  2. Ex  quo;  supply  tempore. 649.  Fnlminis  afflavit  vcn- 

tis;  hlighlcd  with  the  hlasts  of  lujhtning.  Thc  wind  was  supposed,  by  some 
ancicnt  philosophcrs,  to  propel  the  lightning  from  thc  clouds.  Anchises 
was  struck  with  lightning  and  thiis  cripplod,  for  divulging  to  mortals  his 

amour  with  tlic  goddcss  Venus. 650.  Perstabat;  figuratively ;    he  pcr- 

sisted;  fixns  is  used  literally  ;^j-crf,  (in  his  position  and  placc.) 651.  Xos ; 

comp.  139;  thc  plural  for  thc  singular. Effnsi  Iiicrimis  (snnins) ;  eciuiva- 

Icnt  to  effusi  in  lacrimas;  tran.slate :  we  wcre  dixsolvcd  in  tcars.  Somc  sup- 
ply  a  vcrb,  orarc,  or  ohtcstari ;  but  it  scoms  to  bc  utincccssary.     jAicrimis 

is  the  al)lative  of  manncr. 652,  653.  i\c  VCllcf.     Tlie  purpose  of  thc  cn- 

trcaty  iMiplicd  in  the  foregoing  words. 653.  FatO  nrgcntl  inenmbcrc ;  to 

urgc  on  thc  fate  (dcath)  already  impending.     Licumherc  is  uscd  figurativciy 

for  accclerare. 651.  Iw ;  i»rcpo.sitions  bclonging  alikc  to  two  tcrms,  arc 

pometimcs  joincd  by  tlie  pocts  to  thc  sccoiid,  instcad  ofthc  first.  Conip.  v. 
612,  Ti,  410;  fcc  notc  on  293. 655.  In  nrmn  feror;   /  nm  ruafnn^  to 


BOOK    SECOND.  401 

arms ;  or,  io  the  comhat.    Comp.  337. 656t  Jani ;  noio ;  after  cvcry  plan 

has  been  tried  in  vain  to  save  my  father. Fortana;  resource. 658. 

^]}tv&%il  =  exspectavisti ;  as  in  iv.  419.  Herc,  and  in  iv.  305,  v.  18,  the 
present,  instead  of  the  fuiure,  is  used  after  this  verb  ;  also  after  promiilcre, 

iv.  487.     See  ArnoWs  Lat.  Prose,  15. Taatam  nefas ;  such  an  impious 

thought ;  as  that  a  son  should  forsake  his  father  in  perih 660.  Sedet  hoc 

animo  ;  supply  tibi;  this  is  determined  in  your  mind.     For  parallel  exprcs- 

sions,  comp.  iv.  15,  v.  418,  vii.  368. 661.  Isti  leto;  to  that  dcath  (which 

you  choose.)     Gr.  §  207,  R.  25;  Z.  §  127. 662.  Jam ;  presently. 

663.  Aute  ora,  ad  aras.     Both  circumstances  aggravated  the  cruelty  and 

impiety  of  the  murder. Patris,  patrem.     Gr.  §  283,  iv.  ex.  2. 661. 

Uoc  eratj  {ilhid,)  qaod  ;  this  was  itfor  uJiich  ;  ihis  was  the  purpose  fcA'  which. 

Comp.  iv.  675.     For  the  accusative  quod,  see  Gr.   §  235,  R.   11. 665. 

Eripis.     See  663.     The  present  here  seems  to  mean :  you  have  been  and  still 

are  saving  me.     See  Gr.  §  145,  i.  2. 66T.  la  alterias  s.angniue  ;  in  the 

blood  of  each  other.  The  account  of  alter  is  not  sufficiently  full  iu  the  gram- 
tnars.     It  is  evident  that  we  have  here  a  proper  usage  of  the  word,  in  which 

it  is  less  restricted  than  utriusque,  and  less  gcneral  than  alius. ^Mactatos. 

Gr.  §  205,  R.  2,  1 ;  Z.  §  376,  b. Cernam.     The  present  subjunctive  after 

the  leading  verb  erat  is  anomalous ;  but  in  the  mind  of  the  speaker  it  stands 
connected  rather  with  eripis  than  erat ;  thus,  you  have  been  rescuing  me 
THAT  I  MAY  sEE,  &c. ;  this  WAS  your  purposc.  See  Gr.  §  258,  ii.  a;  Z.  §  512, 
note.  The  foUowing  observation  from  Madvig,  383,  obs.  4,  is  to  the  point: 
"  Sometimes  the  tense  of  a  dependent  proposition  is  regulated,  less  accu- 
rately,  not  by  the  leading  proposition,  but  by  a  remark  in  anothcr  tcnse, 

which  is  insertcd  between  the  leading  and  subordinate  propositions." 

669.  Siaite  omits  ut  according  to  Gr.  §  262,  R.  4. 670.  iVanqaam  is  an 

emphatic  substitute  for  non.     Excitement  and  passion  disregard  the  more 

exactforms  of  expression. 671.  Clipco  ;  dat.     The  arm  passes  through  a 

leather  strap,  which  is  fiistened'  behind  and  across  the  middle  of  the  shield, 
and  the  hand  grasps  the  handle  between  the  centre  and  the  circumference. 

Observe  the  imperfect  in  this  passage,  as  in  588. 674«  Patri ;  for  ad 

patrein. 675.  Et ;  also. 676.    Expertas  ;    taught  by  expcrience. 

SuHiptiS  iu  armls ;  in  taking  up  arms.     Gr.  §  274,  R.  5 ;  Z.  §  637. 678. 

Eeliuqnor.     Gr.   §  209,   notc  5. Qaondam ;    once  called,  but  now  not 

treated  as  your  wife. 680.  Dicta.  See  on  i.  111. Oritar  ;  for  the  con- 

jugatiou,  see  Gr.  §  177  ;  Z.  §  210. 682,  683.  Levis  apex  ;  a  light,  point- 

edfame.  It  was  the  appcarance  of  a  flame,  pointed  Uke  the  peak  of  a 
priesl's  cap,  and  called  levis,  light,  because  it  was  airy  aud  unsubstantial. 

Vcrtice — summo  ;  from  the  croivn  of  his  head.     Do  not  imagine  that  his 

head  was  covered  with  a  cap. Fuudere  ;    to  cmit. Tactu  innoxia  ; 

harmlcss  icith  its  touch  ;  in  respect  to  iis  touch.     Comp.  G.  iii.  416. 685. 

Pavidi  metu  ;  trembling  with  fear. Trepidare ;  the  bistorica.  infinitive ; 

m  were  hurrying  about.     See  Gr.  §  209,  R.  5 ;  comp.  iv.  121. 686.  Sanc 


402  NOTES    ON    TIIE    AENEID. 

tos;  lioli/,   bccause  scnt  by  tlic  gods. 688.  Caelo  ;  ioTadcodum.    Compt 

405. 690.  Aspice  ;  iovrexpice;  rcgardm. Hoc  taittnm  ;  supply  ^^e?oa 

tc ;  this  {thmg)  07di/  I  ask  of  thee. 691.  Ilaec  oniina  firina.     Anchises 

thinks  he  sees  in  this  prodigy  a  token  of  divine  favor,  but  requires  some  ad- 
ditional  sign  to  confirm  his  hope.     Ladewig  adopts  augurimn,  the  ccnjectu- 

ral  reading  of  Pcerlkamp,  instead  of  auxilium. 693.  Intonnit  is  imper- 

sonal,  (sec  Gr.  §  209,  R.  3,  (1),)  and  laeTnni  is  an  adverb  ;  it  thunda-ed  on  the 

left.     See  on  &uTpremum,  630. 691.  Stelia ;   here  a  mcteor,  or  firc-ball. 

Faceni ;  a  ficry  train.     Join  rmdta  cum  liice  withface^n  dnceris. 695. 

Tecti ;  of  the  house;  i.  e.  the  palace  of  Anchises. 696.  Idaea  silva.     In 

fhe  pinc  forest  on  Mount  Ida,  south  of  Troy.  The  course  of  the  meteor 
.shovv'ed  that  thc  family  of  Anchiscs  must  flcc  from  the  palace  to  Mount  Ida. 

697.  Tnm;  at  the  same  tlme. LongO  limite  ;  inalongline;  ablative 

of  tlie  manner  of  dat  luccm. Snlcns;  its  track  ;  like  a  furrow  in  the  air. 

699.  Se  toliit  ad  anras ;  Ufts  himsclf  up.     The  old  man  rises  up  from 

his  couch.    See  644. 700.  Sanctnm.    Comp.  686. 703.  Vestro  in  nn- 

mine,  etc. ;  Troy  is  in  your  divinc  l-ecping.  Comp.  ix.  247.  That  which 
survivcs  of  the  family  of  Anchises  rcpresents  Troy,  and  is  destined  to  found 
a  new  Troy  in  another  land.  Anchises  is  now  satisfied  that  this  germ  of  a 
sccond,  aud  more  fortunate,  Troy,  prescrved  in  his  own  fumily,  is  under  the 

care  of  the  gods. 705.  Moenia  ;  for  urhem. Ciarior  rcfers  to  the  roar- 

ing  of  the  conflagratiou ;  the  fire  is  heard  more  distinctly. 706.  Aestns  = 

calorem;  the  fiames  roll  nearcr  thcir  burning  tidcs. 707.     As  iu  6o7  sq. 

thc  hvely  interest  of  the  story  recalls  to  Aeneas  the  very  words  he  addressed 

to  his  father  on  this  occasion. Cervici.     Z.  §  490 ;  Gr.  §  224,  4 

luiponere ;  for  impone  te. 708.  Snbibo ;  supply  te.     Gr.  §  233,  (3) ;  Z. 

880,  note ;  comp.  iv.  599.  Subiisse  humeris  parcntem.  Translate  frcely  : 
/  myself  will  take  you  on  my  shoulders  ;  literally,  will  go  undei'  you  with  my 

shouldcrs. Ilameris  is  the  ablat.  of  manncr. Istc.     See  on  661. 

711.  Longe  ;  at  somc  distance.  Comp.  725.  "Thc  parties  must  not  go  in  one 
body,  as  that  would  be  niore  likely  to  attract  the  attention  of  the  enemy. 
Thus,  too,  the  slaves  must  reach  the  place  of  mecting  by  difiercnt  paths,  or 

from  different  directions,  {cx  diverso.) 712.  Advertite,  with  the  ablat.  of 

niiimns,  instcad  of  the  accusative,  is  very  rare.     Supply  ad  ea ;  attcnd  to 

those  things  which,  &c. 713.  Egressis  ;  to  ihose  having  gone  forth ;  i.  e. 

as  yon  go  out  of  llic  city  thcrc  is  a  tnound,  &c.  Madvig,  241,  obs.  6,  quotes 
similar  instances  from  Livy,  vii.  10,  xxvi.  33.  The  dativc  of  a  participle  is 
occasionally  used  to  dcnote  whcn  (undcr  what  circumstances)  a  thing  shows 

it.«elf. 714.  Desertae.     Comp.  iii.  646,  xi.  813.     Solitary  is  applicd  hero 

to  the  goddcss  licrsclf,  iustead  of  the  temple  ;  iii  prose  it  would  be  templum 

dfscrtum. 717.  Sacra.     Sce  IIector's  admonition,  293,  294.     The  sacrcd 

things  had  been  convcycd  to  the  hotiso  of  Anchiscs,  at  least  a  part  of  thcm, 

by  Panthus.     See  320. 720.  Ablnero.     To  cngagc  in  rcligious  ritcs,  or  to 

tonch  the  sacrcd  things,  without  first  washing  the  hands  in  living,  tliat  is, 


BOOK    SECOND.  403 

runniiig,  cr  spring  water,  was  deemed  impious. 721.  Latos  hnmeros  cor- 

respQnds  to  the  Homcric  evpeas  Sifxuvs.     For  the  accusat.  see  Gr.  §  234,  ii. ; 

Z.  §  458. Snbjecta ;  hcnt,  or  bowed,  (to  rcceive  the  burden.) 7ii. 

Snper  5  adverbial;  as  in  ix.  168.     I  am  covercd  above  as  to  my  broad  slioid- 

ders  and  bowed  ncck,  &c. 725.  Pone.    Comp.  x.  226. Opaea  loeorara  ; 

obscure  places.     Gr.  §  212,  R.  3,  note  4;  Z.  §  435.     See  on  i.  422. ?2T. 

Adverso  glomerati  CX  agaiine ;  crowded  together  in  an  opposing  phalanx. 
"This  is  the  interpretation  of  Wunderlich,  foUowed  by  Thiel  and  Forbiger, 
who  regard  ex  here  as  denoting  manner,     Heyne  take.s  ex  more  literally : 

assembled  or  gathered  together  out  of  the  opposing  army. ^729.  Snspensnni ; 

anxious.    Comp.  114  and  iii.  372. Comiti.    Sqe  711. 731.  Evasisse ; 

to  have  passed  through  in  safety.  Conip.  iii.  282,  vi.  425.  Aeneas  now  re- 
lates  the  sudden  pauic  which  the  near  approach  of  a  party  of  Greeks  occa- 
fiioned,  and  which  led,  in  the  confusion  of  tlie  moment,  to  the  separation  of 

Creiisa  from  the  rest  of  the  party. 735.  Milli.     Gr.  §  224,  R.  2.     Trans- 

late  as  a  possessive  with  mentem ;    my  mind. Nestio  <iVi9A.  =  aliquod; 

some.     Gr.  §  265,  R.  4 ;  Z.  §  553,  at  the  end. Male  aniitnm  ;  unfriendly. 

Comp.  23,  iv.  8. 736.  ConfBsam  eripait ;  equivalent  to  confudit  et  eripu- 

it.     Comp.  i.  69.     In  his  alarm  he  lost  his  presence  of  mind,  through  the 

influence  of  some  unfriendly  divinity. CarSQ.     Comp.  i.   loT. 737. 

Nota  regione  ;  from  the  known  direction  of  the  way.     See  the  examples  of 

the  meaning  of  regio  quoted  in  the  lexicons. 738-710.    This  passage 

has  created  much  difficulty  on  account  of  the  irregular  construction  and 
arrangement  of  the  words.  Mihi  is  naturally  understood  after  conjux 
erepta,  and  misero  agrees  with  mihi.  Below,  in  verse  76  sq.,  the  ghost 
of  Creiisa  reveals  to  Aeneas  that  she  is  in  the  service  of  the  goddess 
Cybele,  but  leaves  him  uncertain  how  she  was  taken  away ;  and  this  is  still 
a  mystery  at  the  time  when  Aeneas  is  telling  the  story ;  hence  tbe  questions 
are  not  inappropriate.  Translate  thus:  Alas!  did  my  wife  Creusa,  taken 
from  me,  unhappy  one  !  by  fate  remain  behind?  did  she  wander  from  the 
path  ?  did  she  sit  down  weary  ?     (It  is)  uncertain.      The  questions  are  di- 

rect. SCH.  is  here  for  an. Nec  connects  incertum  {est\  and  est  reddita. 

711.  Nec  amissam  respexi  animnmye  reflexi ;  7ior  did  1  look  backfor  the 

lost  one,  or  turn  my  tliouglits  (to  her.)     EespejJ  is  taken  in  its  literal  seuse, 

as  in  V.  168,  ix.  389,  x.  269. 712.    Cereris ;    the  temple  of  Ceres.     See 

714;  comp.  Apollo,  iii.  275.     For  the  omission  of  adm  this  verse,  see  on  i. 

2. 711.  Defait — fefcllit ;  she  alone  was  missing,  aiid  had  escaped  the  no- 

iice  of  her  companions,  &c. 715.  Amens  ;    causal;    in  7ny  madncss. 

Que  is  joined,  in  scanning,  with  the  following  verse.  See  Gr.  §  307, 
3,  (1). 

747-804.  Acncas  rctiirns  through  the  city,  and  wanders  everywhere  in  se;ircli  of 
Creusa,  even  veuturing  into  the  midst  of  the  Greeks,  who  now  hold  complete  posses- 
eion.  The  shade  of  Creiisa  appears  to  him,  consoles  his  grief,  assures  him  of  her  hap- 
piness,  and  prndicts  his  tinal  scttlcmeut  in  Italy.    He  returns  to  his  fricuds,  who  have 


404  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

becn  joincd,  in  the  nican  timc,  Ijy  a  multitude  of  fugitives,  aud  couducts  them  tc 
Mount  Ida. 

T48f  Carva ;  fovcava;  holloic. ^RccondOt     Comp.  thc  usc  ot  occulit, 

i.  312 749,  Cingori     Aencas  has  given  h\s  wcapons  to  his  attendants, 

while  carrying  his  father.     Now  he  resuines  thcm. T50.  Stat ;    supply 

7nihi  sciitentia;  the  pnrpose  stands  to  me ;  I  deiermine.     Comp.  scdct,  600. 

751.  Ciipnt ;  for  vitam. 753.  Qna.    See  on  887. Gressum  ;  for 

pedem.     Comp.  657. 751.  Obscrvata  seqnor  per  nodcm ;  /  survey  and 

rttrace  my  footstcps  in  thc  darkness ;  join  retro  with  sequor ;  WtcvaWy,  follmu 

back.     Comp.  736. Lnminc  Instro ;  examine  with  my  eyes.     Comp.  viii. 

153. 755.  Horror;  for  the  objects  which  occasion  horror. Silentia. 

Gr.  §  98  ;  Z.  §  92. 756.  Si  fortC,  si  forte ;  ifhy  chance,  if  hut  hy  chancc. 

The  rcpetition  dcnotes  the  mingled  fcelings  of  hope  and  fear  with  which  he 
retraccd  his  way  horaeward.  With  si  tidisset,  Tepcrturus  or  visurus  raay 
he  supplied  as  the  apodosis.      Finding  liis  own   palace   occupicd   by  thc 

Greelis,  and  partly  in  flamcs,  he  hastcns  to  the  citadel. 759.  Acstns ;  as 

in  706. 7G0.    Arcem;    the  AcropoUs. 761.    Asylo;   m  the  sanctuary. 

The  temple  of  Juno  was  a  placc  of  rcfuge  and  safety,  espccially  on  the  pres- 
ent  occasion,  bccause  that  goddess  was  rcvercnced  more  than  any  othcr  by 

thc  Argivcsr. Phoeutx  had  bcen  one  of  the  teachers  of  Achilles. 761. 

Mensae.  Perhaps  small  tables  and  tripods  of  bronze,  or  of  gold  and  silver, 
which  served  as  altars  of  incense,  or  on  which  the  feasts  of  the  gods  were 
placed,  as  in  the  Roman  ceremony  of  lhQ'lectisternium.     See  Lersch,  §  66. 

765.  Anro  SoUdi ;  solid  with  gold;  for  ex  auro  solido.     Comp.  i.  655. 

^Sine  fiue  ;  incessantly. 773.  Major.    The  ghost  of  the  dead  was  sup- 

posed  to  bc  larger  than  the  living  pcrson. 774.  Stctcrnnt ;  the  penulti- 

mate  syllable  is  .shortened  by  systole.     Gr.  §  307,  (2);  Z.  §  103. Fanci- 

bns.     Thc  ablative  is  more  commou  than  the  dative  aftcr  haerere. 775. 

AlTari.     Comp.  685. 779.  Ant,  instcad  of  nec.     Gr   §  198,  ii.  2,  d;   Z. 

§  337.  "  Thc  connection  of  a  ncw  proposition,  which  is  also  negativc,  by  a 
simple  aut,  is  rarc  and  poetlcal."     Madvig,  §  458,  c,  obs.  2.     Ncithcr  docs 

dcsiiny,  {fas,')  nor  that  ruler  of  Olymp>us  above  pcrmit. 780.  Longa — 

exsilia ;  distant  wanderings;  far  from  your  native  land.  The  plural  indi- 
cates  that  Aeneas  is  to  visit  many  plac-cs  before  he  roaches  his  final  home. 
Supply  either  sunt,  or  with  Scrvius,  smit  ohcunda. — ^Arandnm.     Gr.  §  225, 

iii. ;  Z.  §419,  n. 781.  Tcrram.    Sccon742. Lydins  =  ii^rMsews.    The 

Tiber  was  often  calkd  Etru.^ican,  or  Tuscan,  bccause  it  riscs  in  Etruria;  and 
Lydius  is  hcrc  uscd  by  Virgil  as  synonymous  with  Tuscan,  bccause  the 
Grecks  taught  thc  Komans  to  bclieve  that  the  Etrusci  worc  froin  Lydia,  in 

Asia  Minor, 782.  Virnm ;  as  in  i.  204,  for  hominum. Lcni  as:minc ; 

vnlli  a  yentlc  current.    Conip.  212;   G.  i.  322. 783.  Ucs  laetac  ;  auspicious 

forlunes. Ke^ia  conjux  ;   Lavinia,  tlic  daughtcr  of  king  Lalinus,  was  des- 

liiied  to  bc  thc  wifc  of  Acnoas. 781.  Parta  ;  sccurcd  to  thec,  dcstine.d  for 

Ihec ;  thc  participle  niust  bc  suppHcd  witli  rcs  and  rcgnum.     Gr.  205,  exc. 


BOOK    SEOOND. 


405 


to  R,  2.     See  on  i.   553. Crensae ;    Ccausative  genit. ;  (ears  for  Creusa. 

See.  on  lacrimae  rerum,  i.  4G2. TSSt     Comp.  7.     Creiisa  rejoices  tliat  hcr 

fate  will  not  be  like  tliat  of  Andromaclie,  and  otlier  Trojan  princesses,  who 

are  about  to  be  carried  away  as  slaves.    See  iii.  325-327. 786.  Servitnai. 

Gr.  §  276,  i.  and  ii. ;  Z.  §  6CS,  1  and  2. TST.  Dardauis;  a  daughter  of 

JDardanus.     Gr.  §  100,  1,  (b). 788.  Genetrix.     See  on  738.     Cybele  and 

Venus,  according  to  Pausanias,  saved  Creiisa  from  being  captured  and  car- 

ried  into  slavery  by  the  Grcel^s. 792.  Ibi ;  then.     Collo  is  the  dativc 

after  circnmdare,  the  parts  of  which  are  separated  by  tmesis. 794.  Som- 

no  ;  for  somnio,  a  dream. 798.  Pubeill ;  a  band;  in  apposition  with  the 

foregoing  accusatives,  and  denoting,  as  in  vii.  219,  the  whole  body  of  the 

followers  of  Aeneas. 799.  Aniniis;  in  spirit.     Their  resolution  is  fixed. 

Comp.  xii.   788. Opibns;    mi  rcspcct  to  means.      They  have   gathei-ed 

money,  provisions,  and  the  rcmnants  of  thcir  movable  property. 800. 

Telini.     Gr.  §  266,  3 ;  Z.  §  549. Dcdncere;  the  rcgular  expression  to 

denote  the  planting  of  a  colony. 801.  Lncifer ;  a  name  applicd  to  the 

planet  Venus  as  morning  star ;  which,  as  the  evening  star,  is  Hesperus,  or 

Vesper.     Comp.  i.  374. 803.  Portarnm.     All  the  gates  were  now  guard- 

cd  by  the  Greeks. Opis ;  o/(giving)  aid;  of  delivering  my  country;  or 

else  take  opis  for  salutis." — Cesi ;    /  yielded  to  fate. Moates  petlvit 

Comp.  636. 


?laJn  of  Troy. 


406 


NOTES   ON    TUE    AENEID, 


BOOK   THIRD. 

Tlie  narrative  of 
Aeiieas  continued. 
His  settlements  in 
Tlirace  and  Cretc,  liis 
interview  with  Ilele- 
nus  and  Andromaclie 
in  Ejjirus,  and  adven- 
ture  witli  Poljphe- 
mus. 

Tho   time    embraccd    in    tho 

narrative  of  this  book  is  nearly 

seven  years.    It  begins  with  the 

eveiitB    immcdiately    succeeding 

the  fall  of  Troy,  which  occurred 

I    in  June,  B.  C.  1184.    The  Trojan 

°    fugitives,  under  the  coramand  ol 

g    Aeneas,  spent  thc  remainder  of 

«    the  Bummer,  and  the  following 

g    winter,  in  building  ehips  in  tho 

o    harbor  of  Antandros,  (sub  Anlan- 

a    dro,)  a  city  on  the  southcrn  eido 

ai    ofMountlda.    Tliis  was  the7?rs/ 

"    year,  that  is,  the   firBt  summer 

32    and  wiiiter,  after  the  fall  of  Troy. 

The  second  year  bcgins  with  the 

departure  of  the  exilea  for  Thrace, 

early  iu  the  Bummer  of  B.  C.  11S3, 

and  is  spent  in  the  attempt  to 

establieh  a  colony  tliore,  (66,  67.) 

In  tlie  third  ycar  tlic  new  colony, 

called  Aenos,  or,  as  some  think, 

Aencia,  is    abandoncd,    and    tho 

•wanderers,  stopping  at  Dclos  to 

consult  tho  oracle,  (73.)  proceed 

to  Crete  (131)  and  conimence  the 

colony  of  Pergamciim,  (132-134.^ 

Ilaving  passed   tho  foiirth  yeai 

and  part  of  the  fiftk  in   Crc  c, 

they  arc  compcllcd  by  .i  pesli- 

lcnce  to  give  up  this  pcttlcnicnt 

also,  (190,)  and  thcy  sail  to  Acti- 

um  in  Acaniania,  whcro  thoy  rc- 

mainduringtho_^//i  wintcr,(i!84.) 

They  resume  tlieir  voyago  in  tho 

bcginning  of  tho  sixth  yenr,  O! 

summrr  .•iftcr  thc  fall  of  Troy. 


BOOK    THIED.  -  407 

and  first  landing  near  Buthrotum,  and  meeting  with  Helenus  and  Andromachc,  (294- 
605,)  they  cross  the  Hadriatic  to  Portus  Veneris,  in  Apulia,  (523,)  and  from  thence  con- 
tinue  their  voyage  along  the  coasts  of  Italy  and  bicily  to  Drepanum,  (707,)  which  tlicy 
reach  at  the  close  of  the  sixth  stimmer,  and  where  soon  afterwards  Anchiees  dies, 
(710.)  In  the  begiunLng  of  the  following,  or  seventh  8ummer,-(see  i.  oi  sq.,)  they  start 
for  Italy,  but  are  immediately  driven  by  a  storm  to  the  coast  of  Africa. 

1-68.  Aeneas,  with  twcnty  ships,  built  iu  Antandros,  passes  over  to  Thracu  and 
attempts  his  fij'st  settlement  of  Aeneia,  or  Aenos.  After  commencing  his  colouy  he  ia 
wnrned  by  the  shade  of  the  murdered  Polydorus  to  flee  from  Thrace,  and  again  sets 
sail  vnth  his  followers. 

!•  Rcs  Asiac  ;  the  fortunes  of  Asia.  Comp.  ii.  193,557,  viii.  626.  Troj 
was  the  chief  city  of  Asia  Minor,  and  the  head  of  an  extensive  league. 
Hence  its  affairs  may  be  called  tho  affairs  of  Asia,  as  opposed  to  the  res 
Agamemnoniae,  (below,  54,)  or  power  of  Greece.     Troy  itself,  howerer,  was 

tributary  to  xVssyria,  as  we  learn  from  Plato  in  the  dialogue  on  laws,  iii. 

2>   Immeritam ;   not  having  deserved  (such  a  fate.)    Laomedon  and  Paris 

were  the  guilty  ones,  not  the  Trojans  in  general. 3i  Hnmo ;  for  ab 

humo ;  that  is,  from  its  foundations;  thus  denoting  the  completeness  of  its 

overthrow. Fomat ;  the  present  is  substituted  for  the  pcrfcct  to  express 

continuance ;  for  the  ruins  of  Troy  are  still  smouldering,  when  the  exiles 

decide  to  seek  other  lands.     See  Madvig,  §  338,  obs.  4. Neptania ;  I>^cp- 

tunian  ;  because  built  by  Neptune,  aided  by  Apollo.     Comp.  ii.  625. 4. 

Diversa ;  remote;  it  is  said  here  with  refcrence  to  far  off  lands,  places  of 

exile,  lying  as  it  were  in  an  opposite  region  of  the  world. Desertas  ;  soli- 

tary.     To  the  Trojans  foreign  countries  were  solitary  or  lonehj,  as  being 

held  by  strangers,  and  without  any  homes  for  them. 5i  Aagnriis  ;  omens, 

warnings,  such  as  in  ii.  293,  619,  69Y,  780. 8.  Snb  Antandro.     Antan- 

dros  (now  Dimitri)  lay  on  high  ground  above  its  harbor. 7.  Ubi  sistere 

detnr ;  where  it  is  granted  us  to  settle ;  for  the  infinitive,  see  on  i.  66. 

8.  Prima.  Gr.  §  205,  R.  1*7.  Tlie-  first  part  of  the  summer.  See  prima  so 
used,  i.  541.     By  the  Roman  mode  of  reckoning,  this  was  the  second  sum- 

mer,  not  the  first,  after  the  sack  of  Troy. 9.  Et.     The  copula  has  the 

same  relation  to  vix  here  as  in  ii.  692 ;  uamely,  the  relation  which  would  be 
regularly  expressed  by  qimm.    The  following  quum  in  10  may  be  translated, 

and  then. Fatis  ;  dative. 12.    Magnis  dis.     For  the  spondaic  verse, 

see  Gr.  §  310,  1 ;  Z.  §  841.  The  great  gods  are  such  as  Vesta,  Jupiter,  &c. 
There  were  tutelar  gods  of  the  city  or  kingdom,  and  tutelar  gods  of  the 
family.  Those  of  the  Trojan  state  or  kingdom,  sometimes  called  Trojae 
pcnates,  and  here  magni  dii,  had  been  intrustcd  to  Aeneas ;  but  besides 
these,  he  carried,  of  course,  the  images  which  belonged  to  his  own  house, 

designated  hevo.  hy  jjcnatibus.     Comp.  viii.  679. 13.  Terra  MaTOrtia  ;  a 

land  devoted  to  Mars.     Mars  was  the  tutelary  god  of  the  Thracians. Pro- 

cul  5 /aro^';  this  term  is  relative;  Thracc  is  not  ahsolutely  remote  from 

Troy. U.  Araut;  supply  quam  as  the  obj.     See  on  i.  12. Reguata ; 

ruled  over.     Comp.  vi.  770.     So  Ilorace  uses  this  vcrb  transitively,  O.  2,  6, 


408  NOTES    ON    THE   AENEID. 

11:  Rcffnata  I.nconi  rura  Phalanto.     So  trhtmphata,  w/M/a/a,  iv,  609,  vi. 

8.36. Lycnrgjns  was  an  carly  king  of  Thrace,  who  had  ficTccly  opposed 

the  ritcs  of  Eacchus.     II.  vi.  130-140.     Ilence  acri.     The  prcsent  king  was 

Polymncstor,  who  had  niarricd  Ilione,  the  daughter  of  Priam. 15.  UOB- 

liitinni ;  guest-land,  ally  ;  the  sacred  bond  of  bospitality  uuitcd  Thraco  and 

Troy.      Hoapitium  ia  in  apposition  with  terra. Sociiqne   Penatos ;   and 

thcir  houxehold  gods  were  joined  loith  our.f.  Some  take  Penatcs  \n  ai^jiofition 
with  <crra,  making  it  mean  countri/, 'bx\\.  it  is  bctter  to  supply  era»<;  and 

(its)  hoHsehold  gods  (were)  aUics  (with  ours.) Fortana  ;  i.  c.  the  prospcri- 

ty  of  Troy. Fnit ;  for  intcgra  fnit. 17.  Moeuiai     Tlie  city  of  Aenos, 

now  Enos,  on  the  Hcbrus  or  Maritza,  is  probably  tlie  ouc  wliich  Virgil  has 
in  niind ;  though  thcre  was  a  tradition  that  Aeneas  founded  Aeneia  near 

Thcssaloniea. Injjressns;    having  entered  tlie  country.      Supply  tcrram. 

Fatis  iniqnls  ;    nnder  inauspicious  fates ;  or  against  tlie  fates.     They 

were  not  known,  however,  to  be  hostile  from  any  previous  indication,  but 
from  what  turned  out  after  the  landing  was  made,  and  the  settlement  com- 

menced.     For  the  ablative  here,  see  on  ii.  396. 18.  Aeneadas ;  he  calls 

his  followers  or  citizcns  Aeneadae,  from  his  own  name ;  iniplving  tliat  he 
also  namcs  the  towu  itseK  Aeyieia.     Comp.  beloAV,  693.     Sce  Z.  §  421,  note. 

19.  Dionaeac  ;  Dionacan  ;    onc   of  tlic   appcllations   of  Vcnus,  as  the 

daughtcr  of  Diouc. 20.  Anspifibns  C.  op;  j^atrons  of  ot  favorahle  to  ihe 

work  cominenced. 21.  Coellcolnni.     Gr.  §  43,  2 ;    Z.  §  45,  n.  3. 22. 

Taninlns ;  amound;  not  a  tomb ;  for  Polydorus  was  lcft  unbnried  on  the 

eliore,  and  thc  sand  gradually  covered  his  body. Qno  snnimo ;  on  the  top 

of  lohich. ^23.  Ilastilibns;  shafts,  or  .straight  shoots ;  rcscmbhng  the  han- 

dles  of  spears.    Comp.  46,  below. Horrida  ;  bristUng. 25.  Tcgerem  ; 

according  to  tlie  custom  (comp.  ii.  248)  of  adorning  altars  and  sacred  placcs 
with  boughs  and  wrcaths.  The  myrtle  was  sacrcd  to  Venus,  and  thcrefore 
appropriatc  in  making  a  sacrificc  to  lier.— — 26.     Observe  the  livclincss  of 

the  historical  prescnit  vidco;  joiued  by  — que  to  accessi. Monstrnm  ;  a 

prodigy.     Comp.  ii.  680. 28.  IInic;.dat.  limiting  thc  verb,  for  ab  or  cx 

hac.     Drops  of  dark  blood  oozc  from  that  shoot  which  is  frst  torn  up,  its 

roots  being  broken. Sangniiic  ;  descriptivc  ablative.     Gr.   §  211,  R.  C. 

See  on  i.  104. 30.  Mihi  niombra  qnatit ;  shakrs  my  limhs.     Comp.  i.  92. 

Golidns ;  an  instance  of  proicpsis;  the  eflect  of  fi'ar  is  anticipatcd,  l)y 

beiug  assuuicd  instcad  of  bciug  prcdieatcd. 31.  Altcrlns  ;  and  I  proccea 

to  tear  up  tJie  pliant  shool  of  a  sccond.     Sce  Gr.  §  120;  Z.  §  117. 38. 

Penitas  teutare;    to  explore  thoroughly ;   to  penctrate. 34,  35.     Aeneas 

Bupposcs  tliat  thc  preternatural  appearancc  may  have  becn  producod  by  the 
Nymidis  who  prcsidc  ovcr  tlie  spot,  or  by  Mars,  {Gradivum,)  who  is  thc 
quanliau  of  Thracc ;  and  he  now  implorcs  thcm  to  give  ihc  si^ms  a  favora- 
bie  issuc,  and  to  mitigatc  thc  omcn ;  tluit  is,  to  scnd  anothor  token  by 

which  he  inight  know  ihat   thc  gods  wcre  not  displcascd  wilh   him. 

Crtlfls  ;    for    Thracian. RKe  ;   dnly,  kindly. Scf nndarent ;  mai(f /a- 


BOOK    THIRD.  409 

voruble.     For  tlie  omission  of  ut,  scc  Gr.   §  262,   R.  4. 38.    Obluctor  •, 

strugylc  against ;  brace  myself  against. 39.  Eloqnar.     For  tlie  subjuiic- 

tive,   see  Gr.  §  260,  R.  5 ;  Z.  §  530. 11.  Laccr.is ;  why  dost  thou  tcar? 

tbr  every  cornel  or  myrtle   shoot  is  connected  with  the  body  of  ro'y- 

dorus. Jani ;  now  at  least  j  after  having  repeated  the  torture. Scpni- 

to.     Polydorus  is  covered  by  the  growth  of  shafts,  and  by  the  sand. 4  i. 

Aat ;  continues  the  force  of  the  negative.     Comp.  ii.  V'/^.     7'roi/  prodni-f^l 

me  not  a  stranger  to  you^  nor  docs  this  blood  floxo  from  the  tree. De  stipitc  ; 

Qot  iia  rcality  irom  the  wood,  as  it  appears  to  do,  but  from  the  lacerati  d 
body.     Forbear,  then,  for  you  are  doing  violence  to  a  human  body,  and  evcn 

to  a  friend  and  fellow-countryman. 45,  46.  Fcrrca  seges ;  the  growth  of 

cornel  and  myrtle  shafts  is  called  iron,  because  of  their  iron  points,  or  spear 
heads.     The  cornel  and  myrtle  were  favorite  kinds  of  wood  for  spear  han- 

dles. -Jacnlis  increvit  acntis  ;  has  groim  up  in  sharpened  javelins.     The 

spears,  left  in  the  body  of  Polydorus,  have  miraculously  put  forth  roots, 
which  have  passed  from  the  body  into  the  ground,  and  into  the  accumulated 
eand.  Then  spring  up  a  multitude  of  new  shoots,  of  the  same  wood  as  tlie 
original  shafts,  and  like  them  in  form,  straight  and  tapcring;  fitted,  indeed, 
for  javelins.     Jaculis  is  the  ablative  of  manner ;  so  Wagner.     Ileyne  and 

others  make  it  the  dative  for  in  jacida. 47.  Ancipiti ;  twofold ;  both  the 

fear  occasioned  by  the  blood,  and  by  the  voice  of  the  shade. 48.  Meu- 

tem;  in  mind;  a  Greek  accusat.     See  on  i.  228. 50.    Infelix ;  said  oi 

Priam,  as  in  iii.  691,  of  Ulysses ;  unhappy. Alendnm.     Sce  Gr.  §  274,  R. 

7. 51.    Begi ;    Polymnestor.      See  above,   on   14. Ditfidere  is  more 

commonly  followcd  by  the  dative  than  the  ablative. 52.  Ciagi  nrbem 

obsidionc»  Troy  was  not  strictly  besieged,  in  the  Roman  sensc  of  tho.-^e 
tcrms.  The  heroes  and  thcir  followcrs  ou  both  sides  fought  exclusively  ou 
the  opcn  plain  before  the  city,  without  any  attempt  ou  the  part  of  the 

Grceks  to  blockade  it. 51.  Rcs;  cause,  side,  or  party.     Sce  on  1  above. 

55.  FilS  onme;  all  duty ;  every  obligation,  imposed  by  rcHgion  and  the 

laws  of  hospitarty. 56.  Potitnr.     Gr.  §  177;  Z.  §  210.     Here  of  tlie 

third  conjugation. Qnid  non  pectora  COgis?  what  do  you  not  teach  {urge 

on~)  niortal  breasts  ?  Both  accusatives  are  governed  by  cocjis,  as  a  verb  of 
teaching  or  demanding.     See  Madvig,  §  228,  c,  obs.     Some,  however,  sup- 

ply/cTcere,  others  ac?  before  quod. 57.  Sacra  ;  accursed.     The  word  often 

signifies  devoted,  or  damned,  to  the  gods  below ;    hence  accurscd. 58. 

Primam  ;  he  consults  Anchisesyirs^  as  the  most  venerable  and  the  most  ex- 

perieuced  in  auguries.     See  Lersch,  §  14. 59.  Monstra  ;  prodigies. 

Befero;  Ireport,  or  lay  before  them. 60.  Animns;  for  sententia  or  con- 

silium ;  the  infinitive  follows  in  apposition,  as  in  Horace,  Epode  16,  17-21 : 

sit  sententia  ire.     Gr.  §  270,  R.  1,  (c) ;  Z.  §  598. 61.  Dare  classibns  ans- 

tros  ;  for  classes  anstris.    Gr.  §  323,  4,  (3).    But  Heyne,  Thiel,  and  Forbiger 
do  not  regard  this  as  a  substitution  ;  they  interpret  it  thus:  they  allow  or 
cause  the  winds  to  expand  the  sail  by  exposing  the  canvas  to  theni.  —  - 
18 


410  NOTES    OX    THE    AENEID. 

63«    Aggeritur;    is  hcaped  upon,   aJded  to ;    followcd  by   tlic   dutivc. — 7- 

TDinaiO ;  tlic  mound  mcntioned  above,  22. Arae ;  sometimes  a  pair  of 

altars  stood  to  thc  manes  of  a  dcccascd  person.     See  bclow,  30.5. G5i 

Crinein.     Comp.  i.  480.     For  the  case,  see  ocuIoh,  i.  2'28. C8.  Inferiinas ; 

011  the  grave  or  ashcs  of  the  dead  it  was  customary  to  pour  libatioiis  cf 
milk,  honcy,  sacrificial  blood,  and  unmixcd  wine.     From  tlie  verb  infero,  in 

this  sense  comcs  infcriac. 68.  Condimns  ;  we put  to  rcst.    "Without  the^e 

ceremonies  the  mancs  wcre  supposcd  to  be  wandcring  in  misery.     See  \i. 

020-330. Snpremnni ;  for  the  last  time ;  the  allusion  is  to  tlic  custom  of 

saluting  the  dead  at  the  house  and  at  the  funcral  pyre,  describod  in  note  on 
ii.  644.  Servius  regards  supremum  here  as  an  adverb ;  Tbicl  malccs  it  the 
accusative,  meaning,  the  last  thincf,  or  last  salutatio7i. 

69-120.  Aencaa  arrivcs  at  the  iBland  of  Deloa,  whcre  Lc  is  hosp't.i1)ly  reeeivofl  b.v 
Anius,  the  priest  of  Apollo.  On  consulting  the  Delian  oraclo  the  Trojans  are  told  to 
secli  out  tlio  laud  from  which  their  earliest  ancestors  'wero  dcrived  This  Anchiees 
pronounccs  to  be  Crete. 

69.  Fidcs  pclago  ;  supply  erat ;  when  first  the  sea  could  be  trusted.  The 
natural  order  of  thc  ideas  here  is  reverscd.  When  the  winds  became  less 
rough,  and  the  sea  safe ;  i.  e.  in  the  spring.— — 70.  Crepitans;  murmuring. 

Anster;  iovvcntus. 11.  Bcdncnnt;  draw  down.     Comp.  below,  135. 

Thc  ships  were  drawn  up  and  sheUcrcd  on  the  hmd,  aftcr  a  voyage  had  bccn 

c6mplctcd. Compleat;  cover  ;  being  now  launched  they  friuge  the  shore. 

Comp.  vi.  5. 73.  Sacra  tclins;  a  holy  land;  Delos,  a  small  ishuid  in  the 

midst  of  the  Cycladcs,  the  birth-phvce  of  Apollo  and  Diana,  and  the  seat  of 

one  of  the  priacipal  oraclcs  of  Apollo. 74.  Matii ;  Doris,  wife  of  Nep- 

tune.  The  dative  limits  gralissima,  vcri/  pleasing.  This  spondaic  verse 
retains  the  fical  towcIs  in  matri  and  Aegnco,  uuehded.  Sec  on  i.  G17. 
Neptune  is  called  the  Aogean  bccausc,  according  to  Homer,  II.  xiii.  21,  22, 

his  palace  was  in  the  Aegean  sca. 75.  Pins  ;  bccause  in  this  act  Apollo 

showed  his  filial  picty  to  his  mothcr,  who  had  found  shcltcr  in  Dclos. 

Arcitcnens ;  the  Archer ;  Apollo.  Homcr,  II.  i.  37,  calis  hini  silver-howed, 
ttpyvpoTo^os,  and  in  thc  hymn  to  Apollo,  13  and  120,  To^ocpopos,  hcnrcr  of  thc 

low. Circnm.    Sec  on  i.  32. 76.  Mycono  e  cdsa  Gyaroqnc;  which 

uhc7t  wa7idcring  ahout  all  scas  and  shoi-es,  the  plous  Archcr  hou/id  to  lofly 
Myconos  a7id  Gyaros.  This  is  shown  by  Wagncr  to  be  the  autheutic  rcading. 
^'expresses  thc  pecuhar  shade  of  meaning  rcquircd  bcttcr  than  eithcr  the 
dative  case,  or  thc  prcposition  ad  would  havc  donc ;  for  while  Dclos  is  held 
in  its  po.sitiou  by  bcing  connected  with  Myconos  and  Gyaros,  at  thc  same 
tinie  it  lies  at  some  distance  from  Jlyconos,  and  numy  miles  froui  Gyaros; 
60  ihat  Apollo  may  bc  suid  with  propriety  to  havc  hound  it  forth  fro7)x  these 
two  islands.  rntcr  would  havc  convcycd  only  thc  idca  that  it  was  a/ichored 
bctwccn  thcm ;  e  iini)lics  both  tliat  it  is  attachcd  to  thc/n,  aud  still  at  a  dis- 
taucc  from  them.  The  modern  nameof  J/(/co;ioa'  is  J/i/i'OJ(o,  that  of  C/zaro"!, 
Chin)-a  or  Jura.     The  abovc  u.sage  of  c  or  cx  is  illustratcd  in  IIand's  Thur- 


BOOK    THIRD.  411 

Bellinus,  under  ex,  2i. T?.  Coli,  contemuero.     The  infinitivc,  togetlicr 

with  its  subject,  is  the  object  o[  dedit,  grantcd.  Pee  on  i.  66.  Before  Delos 
was  thus  fastened  it  was  uninhabitcd.     Contemncre  is  to  set  at  nought. 

Hitherto  it  has  been  at  tlie  mercy  of  the  winds. T8.  FCSSOS.     The  voyage 

was  somewhat  more  tlian  two  hundred  miles. TO.  Veneraninr  5  rve  ap- 

proach  tvith  reverence. SO.  Anlns.     The  son  and  priest  of  Apollo. 

Ideni.     Gr.  §  20Y,  27,  c;  Z.  §  697. 8!.  Teiflpora.     See  on  65. 82, 

Cccurrit;  hastens  to  meet  us. 83.  Uospitio  =Ji(re  h(>.t]ntii ;  accordiiKj  to 

the  lavj  of  hospitality.     Others  say:  in  tolcen  of  hospitalitii.     Comp.  xi.  105, 

■^ii.  169. 84.  Templa.    The  plural  indicates  all  the  parts  of  the  building; 

the  courts.  porticoes,.&c.,  as  well  as  the  temple  propcr. Vcnerahar  im- 

plies  approaching  the  temple  as  a  worshipper,  and  offering  sacrifice  on  the 

altar. Saxo  VCtnstO.     According  to  Homer's  hymn  to  Apollo,  83  sq.,  this 

ancient  temple  was  built  in  fulfilment  of  the  vow  of  Latona.  The  material 
out  of  whioh  a  thing  is  made  is  expressed  in  poetry  either  by  the  ablative 

alone,  as  i.  655,  ii.  765,  v.  663,  or  by  cx  with  the  ablative,  as  iv.  138. ■ 

85.  Da  ;  grant  to  us  oiir  own  ahode  ;  not  absolutely  give,  but  fix  by  revealing 

to  us  the  place  which  thc  fates  destine  for  our  permanent  abode. Propri- 

am*,  our  oivn;  i.  e.  enduring.     Comp.  i.  73.     So  Hor.  0.  2,  2,  22,  propriam 

laurmn. Tliymbracc  ;  an  appellation  of  Apollo,  from  Tliyrabra,  a  plain  in 

the  Troad,  where  was  a  temple  and  one  of  the  numerous  oracles  of  Apollo. 

86,  87.  Serva  altera  Pergama;  save  the  second  Troy ;  i.  e.  by  your 

counsel  save  us,  who  are  to  found  the  second  Troy. Reiiqnias.     Comp.  i. 

30. 88.  Qnem  scqnimnr?  what  leader  are  we  to  follow?    For  the  use  of 

the  present,  see  on  ii.  322;  comp.  below,  367,  ii.  678. 89.  Illaberc;  de- 

scendinto,  inspire ;  properly  said  of  the  inspiration  of  the  priest,  but  here 
of  information  to  be  given  to  the  snppliant  directly  by  the  voice  of  the  ora- 

cle. 91.  — qnc;  both;  it  is  lengthened  here  by  the  arsis.    See  Gr.  g  309, 

(1);  Z.  §  828.     The  nominatives  litnina  and  laurus  are  in  apposition  with 

omnia. Limina  is  put  for  the  whole  temple. — • — 92.  Mcns  ;  Mount  Cyn- 

thus  is  meant. Adytis  rcclnsis ;    the  sanctuary  being  thrown  open ;  the 

earthquake  is  attended  by  the  sudden  opening  of  the  inner  sanctuary. 
Comp.  vi.  81.     Adytis  properly  refers  to  the  place  under  ground  from 

whence  proceeded  the  mysterious  voice  or  oracle. Cortina ;  the  tripod; 

strictly  the  deep  basin  shaped  vessel  placed  upon  the  tripod. 93.  Snb- 

missi  petimns  terram  ;  ice  prostrate  ourselves  upon  the  ground. 91.  Dar- 

(lanidae  ;  this  appellation  is  happily  chosen,  becauseit  is  the  birth-pl.ice  of 
Dardanus  to  which  the  oracle  directs  them  to  return.  Tlie  land  lohich  frst 
produced  you  from  the  stock  of  your  ancestors  ;  i.  e.  produced  you,  by  pro- 

ducing  your  forefathers. (^aac.     See  on  i.  573. 9T.  Hlc,  as  in  i.  272, 

refers  to  the  place  just  mentioncd,  the  mothcr  land.     Comp.  i.  282-285. 

101.  Bcverti ;  to  go  back.     The  oracle  directs  them  to  return  to  thcir 

mother  country  ;  but  the  question  now  is,  what  is  the  real  mother  country 
or  cradle  of  their  race. 102.  Genitor ;  Anchises.     Comp.  above,  9  and 


412  NOTES    ON    TIIE    AENEID. 

58. 104.  Jovis  insnla  ;  Cretc  is  so  called  becausc  Jupiter  was  rearcd  iii 

that  islaiid. 105.  Jlons  Idncns;  noyv  Psilorti  or  Monte  Giove,  in  Crete. 

Froni  this  thc  Trojnii  Ida  derivcd  its  name. 100.    Ccntnm ;    a  round 

Qunibcr;  in  Ilomcr  also,  II.  ii.  G49,  kKaT6niTo\is  \  in  tlic  Odysscy,  xix.  174, 

there  arc  said  to  bc  »u«e<y  Cretan  cities. Regna,  rcalms ;  properly  so 

called  beeause  in  evcry  city  therc  was  an  &val,  or  sovercign.     Comp.  i.  338. 
-108.  Rhocteas ;    fron»  Jihoetcnm,  a  promontory  on  tbe  Trojan  coast, 

north  of  Sigenm.     See  on  ii.  312. Primnm.     Comp.  i.  1.     Some  tradi- 

tions  niade  Teucer  a  native  of  thc  Trojan  country,  others  a  Cretan,  who 
migratcd  to  the  Troad.     He  is  callcd  maximus  as  the  a.pxriyfTr]s  or  original 

father  of  the  race. Begno  ;  dative. 110.  Nondnm  steterant ;  hadnot 

yet  been  huilt.     Hom.  II.  xx.  216,   iire\   oviro)  "lAios   Ipr]  ev  TreSio)  vrfTrdhicrTo. 

111.  Hinc ;  from  hence;  from  Crete  was  dcrived  thc  worship  of  Cybele, 

niother  of  the  gods,  iiiagna  mater.     She  is  called  cullrix  Cyhelae,  inhahitant 

of  Cyhele,  as  shc  liad  a  tcmple  in  the  Phrygian  town  of  Cybele. Aera ; 

hrazcn  cymhals,  and  hrazen  sliielJs,  used  by  the  priests,  or  Corybantes,  in 

the  worship  of  Cybele ;  also  callcd  acra  Curetnm.     G.  iv.  151. 112.  \C- 

mns.     There  was  a  grdvc  on  the  Trojan  Ida  consecratcd  to  Cybele,  in  imita- 

tion  of  tliat  on  the  Cretan  Ida. Silcntia  ;  the  strict  socrccy  of  thc  rites, 

that  is,  the  mysteries,  and  the  practice  of  exhibiting  the  figure  of  the 
goddcss  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  lions,  were  also  brought  from  Crete  {hinc 

erant.') 113.  SnWcre ;  with  the  accusative ;  bore,  drew.     Comp.  ii.  708. 

111.  Qna ;  hy  what  pathway. 115.  Gnosia;   Cretan;  from  Gnossus, 

a  city  of  Crete. IIG.  Mt — cnrsn.     The  distance  from  Delos  to  Crete  is 

about  15»)  Ronian  iniles. Adsit.     Gr.  §  263,  2 ;  Z.  §  572,  3d  paragraph. 

118.  Honores  ;  sacrifccs.     Comp.  i.  49,  632.     In  v.  772,  sacrifices  wcrc 

also  madc  to  thc  winds. 

121-191.  Aencfis  lands  in  Crete  witliout  opposition,  as  kiiig-  IJomencus  has  flcd 
from  the  couiUry.  Ilis  new  settlemcnt  is  eoon  visitcd  wilh  plaguo  and  faminc,  and 
tbo  rcnates  dcclare  to  him  in  a  vision  tliat  tlic  Dclian  oracle  rcfcrred  not  to  Crcte,  but 
to  Hcsperia,  or  Italy.  Ancliiscs  roealls  the  tradition  of  thc  twofold  origin  of  tho 
Trojans,  (Tcucer  from  Crcte  and  Dardauus  from  Italy,)  and  adviscs  to  sct  sail  for 
Ucsperia. 

122.  Idomcnea;  for  the  dcclcnsion,  see  Gr.  §86;  Z.  §  52,  4.  Idomcue- 
U9  was  one  of  thc  most  distinguishcd  of  the  Grecian  chicfs  at  the  sicge  of 
Troy.  In  fulfiimeut  of  a  vow  madc  duriug  a  tempest,  to  sacrificc  to  the 
gods  the  first  objcct  whicli  should  mect  him  on  landing  in  Crcte,  he  was 
coir.pelled  to  makc  lii§  own  son,  Mcrion,  thc  victim.  A  pcstilcncc  wliich 
bcfell  tho  pcople  soon  afterwards  bcing  attributcd  to  tliis  act,  Idomcncus 
H-as  cxpcllfd  from  liis  country,  aiid,  tlicrcforc,  plantcd  a  ncw  doiuinion  in 
the  Sallcntinc  district  of  Southcrn  Italy.  Sce  bclow,  400,  aiid  ix.  264  sq. 
Accordingly  tliere  arc  no  powcrfiil  encmics  now  lcft  in  Crctc  to  oppose  tlio 

Trojans. 123.  lloste  ;  are '.tithoul  any  enemy  ;  without  any  one  to  opposo 

\xn.     Gr.  §  250,  2,(2);  Z.  §  460. 121.  Ortyglae ;  quail-island :  Delos. 


BOOK    THIKD,  413 

125.  Bacchatam ;  in  the  passive  signification ;  there  is  no  corrcspjnding 

Eiiglish  term ;  JVaxos  revelled  on  its  hills ;  Naxos,  where  Bacchus  is  wor- 
shipped  on  the  hills.  Comp.  G.  ii.  4SY.  This  island  is  the  largest  of  the 
Cyciades.     It  was  noted  for  the  cultivatlon  of  the  vine,  and  for  the  worship 

of  Bacchus. 12G.  Mveaui ;  referring  to  the  white  marble  of  Paros,  which 

rendered  that  island  conspicuous  from  a  distance  on  the  sea. 127.  Cv- 

cladas  ;  for  the  declension  see  Gr.  §  86.  Aeneas  has  particularized  some  of 
the  Cyclades,  and  some  of  the  Sporades,  and  now  sums  up  the  whole  in  the 

terms  Cycladas  and  terris. Legimns ;  we  traverse.     Comp.  ii.  208 ;  G.  i. 

327.  It  governs  the  foregoing  accusatives,  Naxon,  &c.— — Concita ;  aroused 
hy,  rushing  hy.  This  reading  rests  on  the  best  authority.  The  idea  is  that 
the  number  and  proximity  of  the  islands  render  the  sea,  thus  pent  up  and 
interrupted  in  its  currents,  rougher  and  more  dangerous.  The  reading  con- 
sita,  given  in  many  editions,  means  sttidded. ^——12S.  Vario  certamine ;  as 
they  agproach  more  nearly  the  term  of  their  voyage,  they  encourage  one 
another  to  still  greater  effort.  Their  shouts  and  other  tokens  of  encourage- 
ment  pass  from  ship  to  ship ;  we  may  translate :  wlth  various  signs  of  emu- 
lation;  or  by  enallage,  (Gr.  §  323,  3,  (b), )  the  various  shouts  of  thc  sailors 
arise  in  emulation.     Certamine  ;  in  the  emulation  to  reach  first  the  desired 

home. 129.  Petamas.    See  on  134,  below. 131.  Cnretnm ;  the  Cu- 

retes  were  priests  of  Cybele,  who  worshipped  the  goddess  with  wild  dances, 
accompanied  by  the  clashing  of  their  arms.     They  are  often  confounded 

with  the  Corybantes. 133.  Pergamcam;  supply  urhem.     The  real  name 

was  Pcrgamum. Coguomine.     Comp.  i.  275. .-134.  Arcem  attollere  tec- 

tis  ;  tohuild  up  the  acropolis  with  roofs ;  that  is,  to  make  a  citadel  u'ith 
buildings  raised  one  above  another ;  so  Forbiger.  Others  make  tectis  the 
dative ;  to  erect  a  citadel  for  (that  is,  for  the  defence  of)  their  dwellings. 
Ladewig  adopts  this  interpretation  in  his  last  edition.     Thc  infinitive  after 

hortor  is  poetic.     Comp.  above,  129. 135.  Jam  fere  ;  these  words  must 

be  taken  togcther  ;  even  noio.     Comp.  v.  835-838.     Hand^s  Thursell.,  Vol.  2, 

p.  694. Snbdnctae.    See  on  71. 136.  Connnblis;  here  a  trisyllable; 

connuhyis. 13T.  Jnra  domosqne  dabam  ;  Iwas  administering  justice  and 

assigning  dwelling  places.     Comp.  i.  507. Tabida  ;  in  an  active  sense ; 

wasting.- — Membris  ;  to  (upon)  our  hodies. 138.  Corrnpto  coeli  tracta  ; 

the  rcgion  of  the  air  heing  infected;  i.  e.  the  region,  or  tract,  of  the  atmos- 

phcre  pertaining  to  Crete. 139.  Satis  ;  upon  our  cropjs ;  same  construc- 

tion  as  memhris.  Lucretius  tcaches  that  in  a  pestilence  first  the  air  is  in- 
fected,  then  the  earth  and  water,  and  fiually  living  creatures.     Lucr.  6, 

1089. 110.  Animas  ;  for  vitas. 141.  SterCes  ;  an  instance  of  prolepsis  ; 

as  30. Exnrcre  ;  historical  iufinitive ;  hegan  to  hurn  up. Sirins ;  the 

dog  star.     Its  rising,  which  occurred  in  the  hot  season,  was  supposed  to  pro- 

duce  the   drought  of  that  season. 142.  Seges.     Gr.  §  300,  exc.  2;  Z. 

§  28. 143.  Ortygiac.     See  above,  124. 144.  Irc.     See  on  134. 

Mari ;  ablative  absolute,  with  remenso,  as  pelago  remenso,  ii.  181 ;  the  sea 


414  NOTES   ON    TIIE    AENEID, 

beinff  recrossed. Ycniaui  precari.     Thc  favor  to  be  asked  of  Apollo  is  a 

revclution,  informiiig  tlicni  w/iat  C7id,  &c. ;  the  clauses  introduced  by  quam, 
unde,  and  qiw  bcing  thus  depcndent  on  the  idea  of  respondiug  or  instruct- 

ing  implicd  in  veniam. 115.  Fcssis  rcbus.     Conip.  i.  452. Ferat,  lilce 

da  in  89,  is  said  of  Apollo  as  bcing  able  to  relieve  them  by  dcclaring  wbat 

the  fates  decree  concerning  theni. 146.  Tcutare  ;  to  see.k  for. 147. 

Nox  crat.     Observe  Virgil's  favorite  mcthod  of  introducing  an  iniprcssive 

incidcut.     Comp.  ii.  268,  iv.  522. Tcrrls  ;  ablative  of  situation. 148. 

Plirygii.     Sce  on  ii.  68. 150.  Visi ;  it  was  a  drcam  ;  as  in  ii.  270. 

Jaccntis ;  supply  7nei,  limiting  oculos. 151,  152.  Se  fnndebat  givcs  more 

fulness  of  meaning  than  liicem  fundehat. luscrtas  fcncstras ;   openinga 

left,  or  constructed  in  the  walls. 154.  DelatO ;  wlien,  or  if,  co7iveyed  to 

Delos. Dictorns  CSt;  is  on  the  point  of  Raijing ;  would  say.     Gr.  §  162, 

1-i;  Z.  §  498. 155.  Fltro ;  of  their  ow7i  accord ;  without  being  first  in- 

vokcd.     This  condescension  is  in  rcturn  for  the  piety  of  Aeneas  in  saving 

the  images  of  the  penates  amidst  such  dangers. 156,  157.  Secnti,  per- 

mCDSi  (snmns.) 158.  Idem ;  for  iidein;  it  is  uscd  herc  in  the  sense  of 

etiam.     See  Gr.  §  207,  R.  27  ;  Z.  §  697. In  astra.     Wagncr  makes  in 

with  astra  ferre,  tollerc,  &c.,  an  actual  apotheosis,  and  this  passage  would 
accordingly  rcfer  to  Romulus,  as  well  as  Julius  and  Augustus  Caesar,  the 

nepotes  of  Aeneas,  who  were  carried  up  to  heaven,  and  called  divi. Ad, 

with  sidera,  astra,  coelu7h,  denotes  either  an  actual  apotheosis,  as  i.  259,  or 
an  cxalting  to  great  glory,  as  bclow,  4G2,  vi.  130;  comp.  vii.  99,  272.  But 
Thiel  refers  the  cxprcssion  hcre  to  the  glory  of  the  descendants  of  Aeneas 

ingcneral;  not  to  their  beiiig  litcrally  exalted  to  heaven. 159.  Magnis 

(viris). 160.  Para.     Aeneas  was  not  actually  to  buiUl  the  grcat  citr/  of 

Rome,  but  only  to  prcpare  the  way  for  it  by  foundiiig  Lavinium. Fngaej 

the  voijage. Nc  linqne ;  sluui  7iot. 161.  Non  snasit ;  did  not  point  out. 

162.  Delins.     Apolio  is  so  called  frora  Delos,  his  native  island. Ant. 

See  on  ii.  779. ^Crctac;  for  in  Creta.     Gr.  §  221,  R.  1  ;  Z.  §  398,  note  1. 

163-166.     See  the  same  lincs,  i.  530-533. 167.  Nobis;  the  penates 

idcntify  themsclves  witli  the  Trojans. Dardanns.    The  brothers  Dardanus 

and  lasius  were  nativcs  of  Corythus,  now  called  Cortona,  a  city  of  Etruria. 
They  migrated  £i-om  Italy  to  Samothrace,  and  from  thcnce  Dardanus  passed 
over  to  the  Troad,  wliere  he  raarricd  the  daugliter  of  Teuccr,  and  received 
with  her  a  share  of  the  kingdoni,  which  thus  took  the  narae  of  Dardania. 

The  lutcr  name  of  Troy  was  dcrivcd   from  liis  grandson,   Tros. 168. 

Patcr  ;  this  term  applies  to  lasius  as  bcing,  in  comraon  with  his  brothcr,  an 

original  racmber  of  the  faraily,  or  one  of  tiie  patriarchs. 170.  Kcqnirai ; 

lct  hitn  (Anchiscs)  scek;  Anchiscs  is  rccognized  as  the  chicf  adviscr  and  di- 

rector  of  thcir  movcments. 171.  Dictaca;  another  tcrm  for  Crctan,  from 

Dicte,  a  mountain  in  the  ea.stern  part  of  the  island. 173.  IVcc  sopor  crat; 

nor  was  that  a  dccp  slumbcr;  it  was  not  a  drcam  such  as  raight  attcnd  a 
dcep  slcep,  leaving  but  a  Taguo  and  feeblc  impression ;  it  was  likc  a  rcal 


BOOK    THIRD.  41 5 

vision,  seen  by  one  whcn  awakc.     That  he  was  reaUy  as  feep,  and  that  thia 
«as  a  drcani,  though  a  preternatural  one,  and  meant  to  be  a  wirnin-  i. 

evident  from  the  words  agnoscere  videbar  ;  I  seemed  to  recognlzc. 11^3^- 

the  regularconstructionwouldbee&;  but  the  indefinite  neuter  is  sonie' 
times  used  instead  of  the  pronoun  in  agreement  with  the  fol]owin.r  no.m 

See  Madvig,  §  313,  obs. ;  comp.  vi.  129. 1T4.  Vektas  fOmas  ;  ^/J.  reUed 

locks;  1.  e.  bound  with  the  vittae  or  fiUets.     See  ii.  168,  296 1T5.  Ce'i. 

das ;  the  effect  of  fear. Corpore  :  from  my  body.     Lucret.  6,  9-15 :  mauat 

etotocorporesudor. 1T6,  ITT.  Supinas  manas ;  my  suppHant  hands  ;  the 

palmsupward. ITT,  1T8.  Mimera  intemerata  ;  libations  of  rmmixed  v^ine 

— Foeis;  onthehearth;  the  altar  of  the  penates. Laetns.     Join  with 

fario,  not  honore;  I  joyful,  ov  Joyfully,  inform.     Comp.  169. Pcrfceto 

Iioaore;  fhe  libalion  having  been  made. 1T9.  Ordinepando;  I  tuxrrate 

180.  Prolem  ambiguam;   the  twofold  lineage ;  i.  e.  the  desccnt  both 

from  Teucer  of  Crete  and  from  Dardanus  of  Italy. 180.  Igaorit  governs 

both  prolem,  parentes,  and  the  infinitive  decept^im  esse,  as  direct  objects. 

181.  KoTO;  ofthepresent  day,  modern ;  it  was  natnral  that  at  this  late 

day  Anchises  should  be  liable  to  err  in  deciding  which  of  the  early  hon.es 

of  his  ancestors  the  oracle  meant. Yeternm  locoram  ;  an  ol.jective  -eni- 

Uve  after  errore ;  in  respect  to  ancient  placcs  or  ancestral  seats.      Vetl'um 

is  m  coutrast  with  novo. 183.  Taies  casns;  such  fortuncs ;  namelv  as 

that  we  should  wander  so  lar  and  settle  in  Italy. fassandra.     See  on  ii 

246.— -184.  Repeto;    for  niemini. Portcndere  ;   supply  eam  ;   that  she 

prophested.     See  on  ii.   25.— 185.  Vocare ;  that  slu  mentioned. 18T. 

Crederet,  moveret;  questions  of  appeal;  who  could  believe?  whom  at  that 

iime  could  Cassandra  as  a  prophetess  move?     See  on  ii.  8. 188.  MoniU  • 

v^arned;  i.  e.  by  the  vision. 189.  Dicto;  the  command  of  Anchises ! 

190.  Qnoqne;  also  this  settlement  as  weU  as  the  one  in  Thrac.e. Pan-is 

relictis  ;  afew  (of  our  number)  heing  left.     In  VirgU's  time,  Pergamum  and 
the  supposed  descendants  of  the  Trojan  colonists,  stiU  existed  in  Crete.' 

191.  Trabe;  trabs,  pinus,  and  rates  are  frequent  in  poetry  for  navis. 

€nrrimus;  we  traverse.     Comp.  i.  67,  v.  235;  see  Gr.  §  232^  (2);  Z.  ^  S83. 

193-266.  The  Trojans,  having  set  saU  from  Crete,  are  driven  about  by  a  storm  for 
tbree  days  and  mgbtB,  and  on  the  fourth  reach  the  Strophades,  amaU  Lands  wes 
of  the  Peloponncsus,  where  the  Harpies  dweU.    The  Trojans  are  annoyed  by  the  hI^ 
p.es  and  make  a„  assault  upon  them.    Celaeno,  one  of  their  number,  pronounces 
curse  upoa  the  Trojans,  and  they  leave  the  island  in  terror. 

193.  Apparent  ccelnm-poEtGS ;  the  connective  sed  must  be  supplied  be- 

fore  eoelum. 194.  Caernlens;  dark.     Comp.  above,  64. ldsti^i<  •   a 

hveher  word  than  swrexit. 195.  Xoctem ;  for  darknes,,  as  i.  80  —i,- 

horruit  nnda  teuebris;  ihe  wave  became  rough  in  the  dark  shadows  ■  the  .ca 
becanfe  boisterous  or  bristling,  and  was  overspread  with  the  doon.v  -h-i.'.,.- 
of  the  elouds  —199.  Abstulit.  Comp.  i.  88.  — Ingeminaut  abrnpt.  .a:,. 
Igaes ;  thc  hghtmngs  continuaUy  fla.h  from  the  scvcrcd  clo,ds.     Th-  douu^    * 


416 


KOTES    ON    TIIE    AENEID. 


tbcirsclves  arc  fancicd  to  bc  divided  by  tlie  lightnings. 200f  Caccis  *,  for 

tcnehvosis ;  dark ;    completely  shrouded  in  darkness. 201t  Disccrncrc  ; 

even  Palinurus  says  iliat  hc  cannot  distinguish  the  day  and  ilte  nhjlit ;  that 
he  does  not  pcrceive  when  thc  day  cnds  and  tlie  night  begins  in  tho  heav- 

ens. 202.       With  nec  supply  dicit,   which  is  occasionally  omitted,  as 

here,  after  7!f^a<. Mcniinissc  ;  iov  scire  ;  supplyse;  and  says  ihat  he  does 

not  Jcnow  his  course  in  the  midst  of  the  icave. Pillinnrns ;  the  pilot  of  Ae- 

ncas. 203.  Tres  adco  SOles;  thi-ee  whole  days ;  threc,  even  so  manij. 

Intertos  caeca  caligine.     The  days  arc  callcd  unccrtain  in  wliich  their  way  is 

unccrtain  on  account  of  the  profound  darkness.     Conip.  vi.  '^TO. 206. 

Apcrire  montes  ;  to  disdose  its  mountains  ;  to  bring  its  mountains  into  view. 

Yolvere  fumnm.     Thus  the  Trojans  suppose  it  to  contain  the  dwcUings 

of  mcn. 207.  Rcmis  insnrgimns.     Thcy  exchange  sails  for  oars,  in  order 

to  have  the  ships  more  under  their  command  as  tliey  approach  the  shore, 
where  there  may  be  rocks  and  shallows.     Insurgcre  rcm.  corresponds  to  our 

"spring  to  the  oars."     Comp.  560,  v.  189. 208.  Cacrnla ;  thc  adjective 

is  used  substantively  ;  the  azure  deep.    Gr.  §  205,  R.  7,  {•!). 209.  Stroplia- 

dom.  The  Strophades,  now  called  Strivoli,  are  two  small  islands  situated 
in  the  lonian  sea  west  of  thc  Peloponnesus  and  south  of  Zacynthus.  Thc 
Harpics  are  said  to  bave  been  driven  thither  froni  the  kingdom  of  Phineus 
in  Thracc  by  the  Argonauts,  Zctes  and  Calais,  tlie  sons  of  Boreas.  The 
name  of  the  islands  is  derived  from  aTperpetv,  as  tlie  pursucrs  of  the  Ilarpics, 

by  the  command  of  Jupiter,  bere  turncd  back  to  Greece. 210.  Stant; 

are  situated;  a  livfely  substitute  for  sunt,  as  ince- 

do,  i.  4G,  and  colitur,  above,  73. 211.  Insnlae 

lonio  in  magno.  Tlie  last  syllablc  iu  lonio  is  not 
elidcd,  but  shortened.     See  Gr.  §  305,(2);  Z. 

§  9. 212.  llarpyiae,  (trisyllable,)  Sipnviai  {ap- 

irafw,)    tbe    plunderers. Aliae ;    the   otbcrs 

■\  whose  nanics  are  known  wcre  Ocypctc  aud  AeUo. 

Piiineia.      Sce   on   Priamcia,  ii.  403. 

213.  Clansa.  The  housc  of  Pbineus  was  shut  to 
tbe  llarpics  whcn  they  werc  expcllcd  by  thc 
Argonauts.  Thcy  bad  tormcnted  Phincus  by 
constantly   devouring  or  dcfding   all  tbe  food 

tbat  was  placcd  upon  bis  tablc. 215.  Pestls 

ct  ira  ;  plajue  and  curse. 21(5.  Vlrgiuei  voin- 

( ram  vnltns  ;  the  faces  of  the  winjcd  crcatures  are  virgin  likc.     Tiicy  bave 

wings  and  human  faces. 220.  Lacta  ;  fat. 221.  Nnllo  cnstode  ;  ablat. 

ubsol. :  there  being  no  guard.     They  werc  sacrcd  to  tbe  Harpics,  and  Icft  to 

feed,  as  was  usual  witb  sacrcd  animals,  witbout  a  berdsman. 222,  223. 

Divos — Jovcm.     We  devote  a  portion  of  tlie  prey  as  a  sacrificc  to  tbc  gods, 

out  of  gratitude  for  our  prcscrvatioii. In  partcm  pracdamqne  ;  hcndiadys 

for  in  partem  pracdae.     Conip.  i.  Ol. 221.  Toros ;  couclics,  or  scats  of 


Iliirpy. 


BOOK    THIRD.  417 

turf. Dapibas.     Gr.  §  245,  ii.  4. 225.  Sobitac,  instead  of  the  adverb 

subito. Horrifico  lapsu  \  in  terrific  fli[iht^  or  dcsccnt ;  ablat.  of  manner. 

226.  Clangoribns  perhaps  refers  to  the  loud  flapping  of  thcir  wings  oq 

alighting.     Comp.  i.  39Y.     But  Wagner  compares  Hom.  11.  iii.  .5,  KKa-yyc^ 
raiye  Tr4rovTac,  and  understands  their  dlscordant  cries,  indicated  nlso  in  vox 

dira,   228. 22«,  230.    Comp.  i,  310,  311. 231.  Aris ;  altars  erccted 

for  the  sacrifices  mentioncd  in  222,  223. 232.  Diverso  cocli ;  from  an 

opposite  part  of  tlie  heaven.     Gr.  §  205,  R.  9 ;  Z.  §  435. Cacfis  ;  for  ob- 

scnris. 233.   Pcdibns  ;   instead  of  manihus.     See  217,  abovc. 235. 

EJico  ;  I  dircct ;  as  a  verb  of  commanding,  followed  by  the  svibjunctive  (ut) 
capessant,  and,  as  implying  /  annonnce,  also  followed  by  the  iafiiiilive,  gcren- 

dam  esse. 236.    Ilaiid  SCCns  ac ;    not  otherwise  than. Jnssi ;    supply 

facerc. 236,  237.   Tcctos,  latentia.     Instauces  of  prolepsis.     See  on  i. 

637. 239.  Sl)ecii!.i ;  some  Iiigh  rock  serves  as  a  watch-tower. Misenns. 

The  trumpeter  of  the  fleet.     See  vi.  162  sq. 241.  Obsceaas ;  all  that  be- 

tokened  eviL  Tvas  ohsccnns.     Corap.  bclow,  367,  iv.  455,  xii.  876;  Ladewig. 

Foedare  ;  to  mutilate ;  in  apposition  with  prodia.     See  on  i.  703. 

212.  Jicc  Tulnera  tergo  ;  nor  wonnds  on  their  hodies.     Comp.  i.  635. 213. 

Sub  sidera  ;  towards  heaven. 214.  Seniiesam  ;  trisyllable  hcre  ;  scm-yc-sam. 

246.    lafelix ;   ill  hoding. Riimpit  describcs  hcr  fury ;    pours  this 

cicrse  from  her  hreast. 247,  248.  Bcllnm  etiaia  pro  cacde  bcllamue ;  war 

also  in  return  for  tlie  slaughter  of  our  oxen,  &c. — v:ar?     One  outrage,  the 
slaying  of  our  oxen,  is  not  enough,  but  instead  of  atoning  for  that,  making 

some  suitable  return,  you  now  attack  the  owners  of  the  oxen  too. 

Laomcdontiadae.     Sometimcs  a  reproachful  epithet,  as  Laomedon  was  base, 

comp.  iv.  542  ;  but  not  always  so.     See  Tii.  105,  viii.  18,  and  158. 240. 

Patrio  rcgno  ;  out  of  our  father^s  dominion;  for  the  Harpies  wcre  daughters 
.of  Pontus  or  Poseidon.     But  patrio  may  mcan  their  own,  that  assigned  to 

them  by  Jupiter. 251.  Patcr  omni|)otens.     Jupiter  was  the  source  of  all 

the  attributes  of  his  children,  and  thus  ir.ipartcd  to  Apollo  the  gift  of 

prophecy,  and  the  power  to  inspire  others  with  prophecy. 252.  Fnriarnm. 

Not  the  Furies,  strictly  so  called,  but  of  such  beings  as  the  furies. — ■. — Pan- 
do;  supply  ca,  the  antecedcnt  of  quae ;  Gr.  §  206,  (4);  these  thihgs  I  dls- 

close. 253.  Ventis  VOCatis ;  having  propitiated  the  winds.     Comp.  above, 

115,  and  v.  59. 254.  Italiam.     See  on  i.  2. 256.  Nostrae  caedis ;  of 

our  slaughter ;    our  attempted  slaughtcr. 257.    Ambcsas.     See  on  suh- 

mersas,  \.  69. Snbigat;  after  antequam.     Gr.  §  263,  3 ;  Z.  §  576. 

257.  Malis,  not  malis.     This  prophecy  is  attributed,  in  vii.  123,  (where  it  is 

fultilled,)  to  Anchises. 259.   Gelidns.     Comp.  30,  above. 260.   Jam 

ampUns.     Comp.  above,  192. Armis;  nor  do  they  7iow  wish  any  7norc-4o 

seck  security  with  arms,  hut  loith  vows  and  prayers. 261.  Jnbent ;  for 

volunt. Exposcerc  may  be  translated  seek. Paccm  is  not  improper  in 

connection  with  ar«u's,  any  more  than  with  votis  precihusque ;  for  we  can 

either  fight  for,  or  pra?  for  peace. 262.    Slvc— «cn   slut.      Z.   §   522 ; 

18* 


418  NOTES   ON    THE    AENEID. 

comp.   ii.   34. 264.   Ilonores  ;   sacrifices.      Conip.  above,   118. 265. 

Blinas  ;  tum  away  thcir  curses ;  prcvent  their  fiilfilment. 26G.  Funeia  ; 

tlie  hawser,  or  cable,  which  moors  thc  ship  to  the  shore. 

267-277.  The  Trojans  6ail  by  the  islands  of  the  lonian  sea,  Zacynthns,  (Zanle,)  Du- 
lichium,  (Neochari,)  Ba.mc,  (Cephalonia,)  Neritos,  Ithaca,  Leucate,  (Santa  Maura.)  and 
reacli  Actiuin  in  Acarnania  on  tho  bay  of  Ambracia 

267.  Excnssos  laxare  rndcntes  ;  cquivalent  to  excuterc  et  laxare  rudcntes; 
coinp.  '257  ;  to  uncoil  and  let  out  the  ropes ;  those  by  which  the  sails  wcre 

unfurlcd,  and  held  in  their  places. 269.  Vocabat.    Yirgil  gcnerally  nialies 

tlie  verb  agrce  with  the  nearest  nominative.     Comp.  below,  652,  i.  10,  oT4, 

ii.  507. 2tO.  Zacynthos  ;  now  Zante.     Thcy  coast  along  the  west  side  of 

Grecce  to  Buthrotum.     Heync  compares  with  this  passage,  Od.  ix.  24 :  Aov 

Ajxk'»'  Te  2ajuT;  re  /cot  v\rjfcraa  ZaKvv^o^.     Dulichium  is  now  Neochari. 

271.  Same ;  afterwards  Cephalenia,  now  Cephalonia. Xeritos ;  probably 

a  sniall  island  near  Ithaca ;  though  some  understand  it  to  rcfer  to  the  moun- 

tain  of  that  name  on  the  isknd  of  Ithaca. 272.  Itliaeac  ;  lihaca,  the 

home  of  Clysses,  and  of  his  fathcr  Laertes,  is  on  the  east  side  of  Cephalonia, 

and  now  called  Theaki. 274.  Lenfatac.     The  promontory  of  Leucata  or 

Leucatcs,  now  cape  Ducato,  at  the  south  end  of  the  island  of  Leucadia,  or 

Sa?ifa  Maura. 275.  Et  apcritnr  Apoiio ;  and  (aftcr  we  have  passed  by 

Leucadia)  ihe  temple  of  Apollo  comes  into  vicw.  This  was  situatcd  on  the 
promontory  ot  Actium,  near  the  town  of  the  same  name,  at  tlie  cntrance  of 
the  Anibracian  gulf ;  shipwrecks  frcquently  occurrcd  hcrc,  and  hencc  tbe 
temple  is  said  to  be  dreaded  by  sailors. 276.  Fcssi.     Comp.  78. 

278-289.  At  Actium  thcy  celebrate  games  in  honor  of  Apollo,  and  leave  a  Bhield 
suspended  on  the  door-post  of  the  temple,  with  aa  inscription  to  commemorate  their 

visit. 

278.  Insperata.     Because  they  have  encountered  such  dangers  on  the 

Bca,  and  sailed  so  near  the  homes  of  their  enemies. 279.  Lnstramnr 

JOTi ;  we  perform  lustral  sacrijices  to  Jupiter ;  literally,  we  are  purifcd  to 
Jupjitcr.  It  is  now  thc  fifth  ycar  since  the  sack  of  Troy,  and  Virgil  takcs 
thc  opportunity  to  rcprescnt  tlie  Trojans  as  performing  a  Imtration  accord- 
ing  to  the  practicc  of  the  Romans ;  thus  rcfcrring  that  custom  to  thcir  Tro- 
■an  anccstors.  Thc  lustral  oflcring  is  madc  to  Jupiter  as  suprcme,  and  as 
rcprcsenting  all  thc  gods.  Of  coursc,  offcrings  are  also  inade  to  ApoIIo. 
Augustus  had  ordcred  quinqucnnial  gamcs  to  be  cclcbratcd  iu  honor  of 
ApoIIo  at  Actium,  to  commeniorate  his  decisive  victory  achievcd  thcre,  in 
B.  C.  31,  ovcr  Antony  and  Cleopatra.  By  reprcsenting  Acucas  as  pcrform- 
ing  lustral  games  at  the  same  placc,  and  as  thus  being  thc  founder  of  thc 

Actiau  games,  he   paya  a  high   compliment  to  Augustus. A'otls;    for 

iacris ;  we  light  up  the  altars  with  sacrifces.  Ladewig,  howevcr,  niakes 
votis,  hkc  Jovi,  in  tlic  dative ;  for  sacrifices. — -280.  Cclcbramns  litora  la- 
dis ;  for  the  prosaic  form,  cclcbravms  in  liioribus  ludo^ ;  Gr.  g  323,  4,  (M) ; 
we  cdcbrate  the  Trojan  gamcH  on  the  Aclian  shorc". 281.  Olco  InbentP  ; 


BOOK    THIRD.  419 

ablat.  absol.     Tlie  oil  with  whicli  they  were  anointcd  flowcd  fruux  their 

bodies  while  wrcslling. Palaestras  5  the  gamcs  of  the  palacstra. 284. 

CircniHYOMtar ;  the  sun  is  comphtlng  its  great  circlc ;  is  bringing  the  year 
to  its  close;  the  accusative,  according  to  Thiel  and  others,  is  governcd  by 
volvitur  as  a  deponent  verb.  .  Comp.  Hor.  Ep.  2,  2,  125,  agrestem  Cgclopa 
movetur.  See  Gr.  §  232,  (2).  Navigo,  curro,  vehur,  volvor,  arc  followed  by 
the  accusative  in  poetry.     Great  circle,  is  the  annual  circle  or  iniaginnry 

orbit  of  the  sun. 28S.  Acre.     See  on  sa.ro  above,  84. GestaoJCa  Abau- 

tis  ;  the  equipment  of  Abas  ;  carried  by  Abas.  This  was  an  ancient  liing  of 
the  Argivcs,  one  of  whoso  descendants,  Virgil  imagines,  was  slain  by  Acneas 
atTroy;  thus  leaving  to  the  victor  his  shield  as  a  trophy,  which  is  iiow 
fastcned  upon  the  door-post,  (facing  the  visitor,  adverso,)  so  as  to  meet  the 
eye  of  one  entering  the  teraple.  Shields  were  often  suspended  in  temples 
as  votive  offerings,  and  it  is  as  such  a  token  of  revcrence  and  gratitude  that 
Aeneas  thus  presents  the  shield  of  Abas  in  the  temple  of  Apollo. — ^287. 

Rcm;  the  fact  merely  that  it  is  an  ofFering  made  by  Aeneas. Carniiae; 

with  the  verse;  the  verse  following. 288.  Aese.is;  supply  dedicavit ;  Ae- 

neas  consecrated  thcse  arms  (taken) /ro?«  the  vietorioiis  Greeks. 

290-505.  Aeneas  sails  again  to  the  northward,  and  lands  at  Pelodcs,  tlie  Bcaport  ol 
Biithrotum,  in  Epirus.  At  Buthrotum  he  haa  an  interview  with  Hclcnus,  the  brother 
of  Hector,  and  Andromache,  formerly  the  wife  of  Heotor,  and  morc  rccently  the  slavo 
of  Pyrrhus,  but  now  the  wife  of  Hcleuus.  By  a  wonderful  combination  of  events, 
Heleuus  and  Andromache  havo  come  to  bc  the  rulers  of  Chaonia,  a  part  of  Epirus. 
Just  before  parting  with  Aeneas,  Helcnus,  who  is  a  pricst  and  prophet,  gives  him  in- 
structions  and  warnings  about  his  future  course  ;  informing  him  that  his  new  kiugdora 
is  to  bc  planted,  not  on  the  nearest  (or  Adriatic)  shore  of  Italy,  but  on  the  farthest  (or 
Tyrrhenian)  shore  ;  that  he  must  pass  round  tho  peninsula,  shunning  the  uew  Grcck 
colonies,  established  by  Idomeneus,  the  Locri,  aud  Philoctetes  ;  that  hc  must  not  cn- 
ter  the  straits  of  Scylla  aud  Charybdis,  (the  straits  between  Italy  and  Sicily,)  but  sail 
round  Sicily  by  the  south,  and  enter  the  Tuscan  sca  from  Drepanum ;  that  he  must 
seek  an  inter^-iew -n-ith  the  prophetess  or  Sibyl  at  Cumae,  (near  N.aples.)  who  wiil 
give  him  directions  for  his  future  guidanoe,- 

291.  Ph.nca€!iia ;  the  people  of  Phaeacia,  afterwards  Corcyra,  and  now 

Corfu;  celebrated  in  the  Odyssey. Abseondimas ;   we  lose  sight  of;  or 

pass  rapidly  away  fi-om. Ak?ecs  ;  heights,  or  mountains. 292.  Legimus ; 

we  coast  along  the  shorcs,  d:c. Portn ;  dative. 293.  Chaoulo  ;  the  har- 

bor  is  so  called  because  situated  in  Cliaonia,  a  region  of  Epirus.     The  name 

of  the  port  pertaiuing  to  Buthrotum  was  Felodcs,  now  Annr/ro. Batliro- 

ti ;  Buthrotum,  or  Buthrotus,  now  Butrinto,  situated  on  high  ground  at 
some  distance  inland  from  the  port.     The  gcnitive  of  geographical  terius 

instead  of  the  case  in  apposition,  (urhem  Buthrotum,)  is  mostly  poetic. 

295.  Helenuni;  Helenus;  one  of  the  sons  of  Priam,  renowned  as  a  prophet, 
(comp.  Hom.  l\.  vi.  '76.)  Being  made  prisoner  by  the  Greeks,  he  was  car- 
ried  by  Pyrrhus,  the  son  of  Achilles,  to  Epirus.  That  the  son  of  the  priuci- 
pal  enemy  of  the  Greeks  should  now  be  a  king  in  Grecian  citics  fiUs  Aencaa 
with  surprise.     Tlie  position  of  the  words  aids  the  contrast  of  idcas. 


420  NOTES    ON    TIIE    AENEID. 

Per;  for  in,  where  tlicre  is  thc  idea  of  pcveral  individual  objects  contained 

within  a  grcat  cxtcnt  of  spacc. 296i  Conjagio  ]    for  covjuge. 297i 

Patrlo  niarito;  a  husbaud  of  lier  oivn  country ;  i.  e.  of  Troy,  the  country 

which  had  becomc  hers  by  marrying  Ilcctor. Iteram  ccssisse  ;  has  agahi 

become  subject  to,  or  fallen  to  thc  lot  of.     Cynip.  ccssit,  333,  xii.  17.     Ilcle- 

nus  is  hcT  second  Trojan  husband;  hence  iterum,  a.  sccond  time. 289t 

Casns  tantos ;  such  fortunes ;  such  as  those  which  have  made  a  Trojaii 
prince  first  a  captive  and  slave,  and  now  a  lcing  in  Greece,  and  the  liusband 
of  one  who  has  been  both  the  wife  of  his  brotlier  Ilector  aud  of  Pyrrhus. 

The  infinitives  aftcr  ainore,  as  in  ii.  10. 300t  Progrcdior;  Aeneas  goea 

tittcndcd  with  a  part  of  his  companions  only,  and  without  Ascanius.     After- 

wards  thc  Trojans  are  all  entertained  by  Helenus. Portn.     See  on  292. 

301.  Qnam  foite  *,  not  and  thereupon,  as  in  10,  in  which  sense  it  would 

have  becn  followcd  by  the  present  or  perfect,  instead  of  libabat,  but  as  by 

chance,  or  at  the  moment  when  by  chancc. Solemnes  dapcs;  aiinual  funcral 

sacrifices ;  not  solcmn,  iu  our  acceptation  of  the  tcrm. 302.  Faisi  Simo- 

Cntis  \  the  feigned,  or  countcrfeit,  Simois.  Ilelenus  and  Androniache  had 
indulgcd  their  love  of  country  by  applying  Trojan  names  to  this  strcara  and 

to  other  objccts  in  their  new  kingdom.     Sec  bclow,  335,  336,  349,  497. 

303.  Indromache,  d;iughter  of  the   Cilician  king  Eetion,  and  formerly  wife 

ofHector. 304.  Uectorenm  ad  tnmnlnm  ;  at  the  tomb  of  Ilector  ;  this  was 

a  cenotaph,  or  tomb  without  the  body,  or  ashes  of  Ihe  dead.     Hector's  rcal 

tomb  was  at  Troy.     For  the  possessive  adjcctive,  see  on  i.  200. \'irjdi 

qnem  ccspitc  iuanem  sacravcrat;  which,  (formcd)  of  grccn  turf  (and)  onpty, 

she  had  consecrated.     For  thc  ablat.  see  on  84. 305.  Gcminas  aras.     Sec 

on  63. Cansam  lacrimis ;  an  occasion  for  tears  ;  because  the  tomb  and 

the  altars  would  remiud  her  of  Hector. 307.  Maguis  monstris ;  7c)T//j'V(i 

hy  the  grcat  prodigy.  To  her  the  sudden  apparition  of  Aencas  and  his  fol- 
lowers  was  thc  niore  likely  to  seem  supernatural,  bccausc  her  mind  was  on 
the  deceased  Hector,  and  the  scencs  of  the  Trojan  war  in  which  Ilector  and 

Acneas  had  bcen  associated  together. 309.   Longo  tcmpore ;   for  post 

longum  tcrnpus.     The  ablative  is  not  unfreqnently  so  used.     See  Z.  §  480. 

■  310.  Vera  ;  rcal ;  natural,  or  living. Tc  ;  addressed  to  Aeneas. 

Fatics  ;  forni ;  dost  thou,  as  a  real  form,  a  rcal  mcssengcr,  prcsent  thysclfl 

311.  Rceessit;  has  dcpartcd  from  thee.     Thcscnseis:  if  thou  art  dead, 

and  comcst  from  the  lower  world,  and  from  the  as.«;embly  of  Trojnn  hcroes 

therc,  tell  me  whcrc  in  that  world  i.>  niy  Ilcctor? 313.  Clamore ;  vith 

loud  lamcntations. 314.  Snbjicio  ;  scarccly  do  I  utler  in  rcphj. Et — 

hisco  ;  and  much  agitated  I  spcak  in  faUcring  accenis.     Hisccre  is  to  opeu 

the  mouth  wilh  the  eflbrt,  but  almost  without  the  power,  to  articulatc. 

31G.    Answerto  the  qucslion  in  310. Vera  ;  rcalitics. 317.  Dejectani 

conjnge  ;  dfprivedaf  such  a  husband. 31 S.  Excipit;  attcnds  thrc ;  litcr- 

ally,  catches  or  ovcrtakes  thce.     Sec  on  excipiet,  i.  270. 319.  llectoils' 

Audromaclic,  etc. ;  oncc  the.  Andromnchc  nf  Ifccfor,  dosf  thon  kccp  thr  mar- 


BOOK    THIRD.  421 

riage  iies  of  Pyrrhm  ?  The  wife  of  tlie  principal  dcfende:  of  Troy,  are  yoi 
now  united  with  Troy's  bitterest  enemy?  Not  said  in  rcproacb,  but  in  grief 
that  ber  hard  fate  is  such.  Ladewig  adopts  the' conjcctural  reading  of 
Peerlkamp  i»  this  passage.  Thus :  Aut  quae  diguu  satis  fortuna  rerixii 
Hectoris  Andromaclien  ?  Pyrrhin^  connubia  serras?  For  tbe  gcnitive, 
Hectoris,  see  Gr.  §  211,  E.  7  ;  Z.  §  761.     E  in  tbe  interrogative  ne  is  sonie- 

tinies  elided  as  here  in  Pyrrbin'. 320.  Dejecit.     She  feels  humiliated, 

tbough  innooent  of  any  voluntary  misconduct,  and  tberefore  sbe  answers 
witb  downcast  looks.  Sbe  is  the  victim  of  necessity  and  fate,  but  she  can- 
not  escape  some  sense  of  sbame  in  tlie  thought  of  ber  connection  with  Xe- 

optolemus. 321.  Virgo.     The  allusion  is  to  Polyxena,  the  daughter  of 

Priam.     Sbe  was  slain  as  a  sacrifice  at  tbe  tomb  of  Acliilles,  wbo  had  been 

enamored  of  her,  and  bad  sought  her  band  in  marriage. 323.  Jnssa ; 

when  commanded ;  the  participle  indicates  the  cause  of /e^/a:. Sortitns  ; 

allotments,  distributions  by  lot.     Compare  the  style  of  tbis  passage  with  tbat 

of  i.  94  sqq. 325.  Nos  ;  for  cgo ;  in  contrast  witb  Polyxena. Divers.l. 

As  above,  in  4. 326.    Stirpis  Acllilleae ;    iov  filii.     Achillei;  Pyrrhus. 

327.  Servitio  enLxae ;  having  bome  children  in  slavery.     The  tradition 

was  that  she  bore  three  sons  to  Pyrrhus ;  Molossus,  Pileus,  and  Pergaraus. 

328.  Lacedaemoaios  ;  Hcrmione  was  the  daughter  of  Mcnelaus  of  Lacedae- 
raon,  and  of  Helen,  the  daugbter  of  Leda.  Her  graudparents,  Tyndareus 
and  Leda,  bad  promised  ber  in  marriage  to  Orestes,  but  ber  fatber  gave  ber 
to  Pyrrhus.  Orestcs,  ah-eady  frantic  with  the  consciousness  of  having  mur- 
dered  his  mother,  {scelerum  Furiis  agitatus,)  and  still  more  maddcned  at  tbe 
loss  of  bis  betrotbed,  {ereptae  covjuyis,')  came  upon  Pyrrbus  at  Delpbi,  whcre 
be  was  worsbipping  at  the  altar  erected  to  Achilles,  {patrias  aras,)  and 

Blew  bim. 329.  Famalaniqne.     The  particle  que  bere  connects  famulo 

nndfamulam,  in  tbe  sense  of  etiam,  or  et  ipsam  ;  gave  me  to  Helenus  a  slave, 

(being)  also  myself  a  slave. 332.    Exfipit.      See  on  318. Patrias  ; 

equivalent  to  patris. 333.  Slorte.     Tbiel  makes  tbis  an  ablative  of  time; 

at  the  death. Rcddita ;   being  dclivered  up.     Ladewig  says,  being  given 

again  to  a  king ;  i.  e.  to  king  Helenus  after  king  Pyrrbus.  Ilelenus  as 
a  prophet  bad  saved  Pyrrbus  on  bis  homeward  voyage,  and  thus  won  his 

gratitude. 335.   Trojano  Cliaone.     Chaon  was  a  friend  or  brother  of 

Helenus,  for  whom  be  is  said  to  bave  sacrificed  bis  Ufe.     The  name  of  Cha- 

onia,  however,  appears  to  date  fartber  back  tban  the  time  of  Aeneas. 

336.  Pergama  Iliacamqne  arcem ;  the  second  term  merely  defines  the  first 

hy  epexegesis.     Comp.  i.  2:  Ilaliam  Lavinaque  litora ;  and  i.  569. Jn- 

gis  ;  ablative  of  situation. 330,  340.  Qnid  ;  supply  agit ;  how  fares  the 

boy? Snpcrat  ?    survive;   as  in  ii.  643. Et  vescitnr — qaae  tiUi  jam 

Tl"0Ja ;  and  docs  she  breathe  the  air  of  life,  who  (was  married  to  thee)  ivhen 
Troy  had  been  already  (some  time  besicged.)  Many  ediiions  have  quem,  re- 
ferring  to  Ascanius,  instead  of  quae,  referring  to  Creiisa ;  and  the  idea,  in 
•  hat  case,  may  bc :  wkom  (Creiisa  borc)  to  thce  whcn  Troy  ims  already  (sur- 


422  NOTES    ON    THE    AEMEID 

roundcd  by  tlic  Grccks.)  TIic  supposition  tliat  Yirgil  lcft  tlic  line  unfinished 
in  ordor  to  cxprcss  thc  emotion  of  Andromache  is,  pcrhaps,  tlic  most  absurd 
cxplanation  of  the  many  which  havc  bccn  given  of  this  passage.  The  vcrse, 
with  thc  reading  qitcm,  may  be  thus  completed :  obseaaa  ext  enixa  Creiisa. 

311.  Efqaa.     Gr.  §  137,  R.  4;  Z.  §  136  at  the  cud,  and  note. Ta- 

men.  Pcrhaps,  according  to  the  iuterpretation  of  Wagner,  the  poet  fancies 
that  sonie  suddcn  exchimation,  or  gcsture  of  gricf  on  the  part  of  Aeneas 
makes  Andromache  aware  that  Creusa  is  lost.     Tamen  would  then  eignify 

yet  tJiough  shc  bc  dcad. 312.  Ecquid;  merely  an  cmphatic  intcrrogative 

particlc;  sce  Gr.  §  198,  ii.  R.  a  and  b ;  Z.  §  351  ;  do  tlien  his  father,  &c.  ? 
Do  thcir  charactcrs,  and  the  knowlcdge  that  he  is  rchitcd  so  nearly  to  them, 

stimukate  him  to  noble  conduct? 313.  Avnucnlus.     Ilector,  according  to 

Appolodor.  iii.  12,  5,  was  the  brother  of  Crciisa. 314.  rnndcbat.     Thia 

vcrb  is  so  usod  also  in  v.  234,  842,  and  vi.  55. 345.  Incassnm ;  in  vain; 

for  gricf  cannot  rcstore  the  dead. Flctns  ;  lainentationx. 347.  SUOS ; 

his  coiintripnen. 348.  Mnltnm  ;  advcrbially ;  abunJantli/,  copionsly. 

319-351.   Tiojam,  Pergauia,  etc.     Sec  on  802. Arcntcra — rirnm  ;   the 

shallow  stream  ivith  (or  of)  the  name  of  Xanthv.s.     For  the  ablat.  see  Gr. 

g  211,  R.  6,  (1). Amplcttor.     It  waa  the  ancient  custom  to  erabrace  and 

kiss  the  threshold,  the  gate  and  the  door-post,  cither  on  leaving  or  rcturn- 
ing  to  the  ancestral  roof.     Comp.  ii.  4'JO.     The  Trojan  names,  in  this  in- 

stancc,  bring  Aenoas  to  his  home  again. 352.  Tcncri.     After  the  inter- 

view  betwccn  Aenoas  and  his  fricnds  abovo  dcscribed,  all  the  Trojans  arc 

invited  to  sharc  in  tlie  hosiiitalitics  of  king  Ilclcnus. 354.  Anlai  medio ; 

in  the  midst  of  tJie  airinm,  or  court.     Sce  on  i.  605;  Gr.  §  43  ;  Z.  §  45,  n.  2. 

Libabant  pocala  ;  thci/  jionrcd  nut  citps  of  wine  in  lihations.     So  rcmark- 

able  a  nieeting  required  spccial  honors  to  thc  gods.     Yov  pocula,  sce  p.  300. 

355.  Impositis  auro  dapibus  ;  having  placed  the  fcasts  (or  sacrificcs  foi 

the  gods)  071  golden  chargers;  as  at  a  Roman  lectisternium. Patcras  tcae- 

bant.      They  held  the  goblets  while  making  libations.      Thcse  rcligious 

cercmouies  opcn  the  bauquet  givcn  to  thc  guests. 357.  Tnmido ;  sidcU- 

ing ;  thatinflatcs. Carbasus;  canvas  ;  perhaps  from  the  Sanscrit  karpAsa, 

signifying  cotton.     Gr.  §  92,  3. 359.  Intcrpres  diTum  ;  interprcter  of  ihe 

divine  counsels.  The  knowledge  of  future  evcnts  was  derivcd  cithcr  froni 
dircct  inspiration,  or  from  signs.  Ilolcnus  had  both  gifts.  IIc  reccivcs  tlie 
direct  influence  of  Apollo,  Hke  the  Pytliia  on  the  tripod  at  Delphi,  or  likc 
the  pricsts  in  the  oracular  grotto  of  Claros,  in  lonia;  hc  also  undorstands  the 
warnings  of  the  stars  and  the  notcs  and  the  flight  of  birds ;  that  is,  he  i.^  a 

prophet,  an  astrologcr,  and  an  auspe.t. 362,  3fl3.  Prospcra  rcllgio ;  aus- 

picioMs  angurij.  Religion  is  tlie  observancc  of  sacrod  rites  and  dutics.  As 
these  include  the  consulting  of  oraclcs,  and  the  othcr  modes  of  ascertaining 

the  future,  re%io  is  bere  for  augury. Jfnaiine ;  for  oraculo;  bg  rcvela- 

tion;  by  divine  tokcns  ;  the  clause  is  explanatory  of  thc  foregoiug. 364« 

The  infinitive  for  thc  subjunctivo  a{{\:v  suasiruni ;  comp.  111,  above.     Sce 


^  BOOK    THIRD.  423 

Gr.  §  273,  2;  Z.  §  615. ^Tentare;  to  seek  for;  penetrate  to.     Comp.  ii. 

38. Rcpostas;  ior  o-epositas  ;  remote.    Corap.  vi.  59. 3o5.  Dicta  nef.is. 

Gr.  §  276,  iii,  R.  2;  Z.  §  G70. Harpyia.    Sce  on  212. 30T.  Obsecnam 

famcm  ;  minatural  hungcr  ;  the  plirase  defines  more  pre-cisoly  what  is  racant 

by  prodir/iimi  and  iras.     Fov  the  sense  of  obscenam,  see  above,  on  241. 

Vito  ;  indicative  for  the  indircct  interrogative  vitem,  or  vitanda  sint,  depend- 
ent  on  fare.     For  the  prcsent  tense,  comp.  ii.  322.     Ladewig  makos  thcse 

questions  indepcndent;    regarding  posftim  as  potcntial. Qnld  scqnens; 

(by)  pursuing  what  course. 369.  De  more.     Comp.  i.  318. 310.  Pa- 

ccm  ;  as  vcniam  above,  14A,favor. Yittas  resolvit ;  the  fillets  (see  on  81) 

worn  by  the  pri<»st  in  sacrifice,  must  be  removed  fiom  his  liead  when  about 
to  be  inspired,  "  that  the  god,"  says  Schraid,  "  might  work  freely  in  him." 
As  if  the  brain  Uterally  expanded  under  the  divine  infiuence.     See  vi.  77  sq. 

371.  Limina.     Yirgil  understands  that  ApoUo  has  a  teniple  in  thc  new 

Pergama  of  Helenus,  as  he  liad  prcviously  in  the  o!d  Pcrgama. 3T2. 

MaltO  ;  poiccrful ;  as  Hor.  0.  4,  2,  25.- Snspensnm  ;  filled  wiih  aue. 

374,  375.  Kara  introduces  the  ground  on  which  Helenus  deems  it  proper  to 
revcal  the  will  of  the  gods  to  Acneas ;  aud  that  ground  is  the  manifest  fact, 
iust  asserted  by  Aeneas  himself  in  362-364,  that  he  is  under  the  guidance 
of  thc  great  gods.     /  u-ill  declare  to  you  in  words,  d:c.,for  it  is  plain,  &c. 

Miijoribns  anspiclis  ;  undcr  the  greater  auspices;  i.  e.  under  tliose  of  the 

greater  gods;  Jupiter  himself  directs  and  guards  Aeneas. Manifesta  fides 

(cst) ;  is  a  nianifest  truth.     Ire  is  the  subject  of  est.     Fides  by  metonymy, 

for   that   which   produces  confidence. 37G.    Sortitnr ;    determines. 

Vclvit  yiccs  ;  disposcs  events ;  arranges  the  vicissitudes  of  your  lile.     Sce  on 

volvere,  i.  9,  and  22. Is  TCrtitur  ordo ;  this  course  of  things  is  moving 

round;  is  on  the  point  of  being  fulfiUed  in  your  fortunes. 377.  Qno , 

followed  by  the  subjunctive.     Gr.  §  202,  R.  9 ;  Z.  §  536,  (c);  ArnoId's  Lat. 

Pr.  G3. Eospita ;  hospitahle;  because  fricnds  dwell  on  the  coasts  of  the 

seas ;  as  in  Epirus,  Sicily,  aud  Carthage.     Others  translate  it,  strange. 

870.  Expediam  dlctis ;  for  narrabo. 380.  Stlrej  fari ;   the  fates  prevent 

Hclenus  from  knoiving,  Juno  forbids  him  to  say.  The  fates  on  the  one 
hand  limit  the  prophetic  knowledge  of  Helenus,  and  on  the  other  some  of 
the  things  which  hc  knows,  the  dread  of  Juno  deters  him  from  disclosing. 
He  will,  therefore,  reveal  to  Aeneas  but  a  fcw  things  out  of  the  many  which 

await  him. Cetcra  comprehends  both  the  future  events  which  he  is  ig- 

norant  of,  and  those  which  he  is  afraid  to  mention. 381.  Itallani.     Not 

the  whole  of  Italy,  but  that  part  which  is  destined  for  the  Trojans.  A  long 
impracficable  way  scparates  that  destincli  Italy  far  from  you  by  continuous 

lands  (longis  terris.) Invia ;  impracticable  by  laud. Tcrris  is  an  abla- 

tive  of  cause,  to  be  joined  with  dividit.  It  refers  to  the  southern  part  of 
the  peniusula,  and,  perhaps,  also  to  Sicily,  which  they  must  pass  round  be- 
fore  they  can  reach  their  new  country.  Supply  citjus  before  portus ;  and 
'Jie  neighboring  ports  of  which,  &c.     But  the  dcmonstrative  cjus  is  somctime? 


424  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID.  t" 

fouud  iii  a  clausc  thus  appcnded  to  a  rclativc. 384.  Lcntandns ;  must  be 

hcnt;  must  bc  dipped.     Tlie  oar  bladcs  bcnd  and  spring  when  plied  iu  the 

water. 385.  Salis  Ansonii ;  of  thc  Ausonian  sca ;  that  part  of  the  sca 

which  hes  between  Tuscany  and  Sicily. 386.   lufernique  lacns.     Lake 

Avcrnus,  near  Naplcs,  bctween  Cumae  and  Puteoli.  Scc  wood-cut,  page 
501.  The  verb  lusirare  applies  strictly  to  aequor,  but  is  accommodatod  also 
to  the  scnsc  oi  Incus  and  insula;  must  be  visited.     See  zeugma,  Gr.  §  323,  i. 

(■2)  (a). Acrtcae  ;  frora  Aea,  a  city  of  Colchis. Insnla  ;  tlie  promontory 

of  Circeium,  now  3Iontc  CirccUo,  having  the  sea  on  one  sidc  and  thc  rontine 

marshcs  on  the  other,  and  thus  an  insula. 387.  Possis ;  the  subjunctive 

after  antequam.     Gr.   §  263,   3 ;  Z.   §  576. 389.  Qnnni.     The  sow  and 

her  progcny  of  thirty  young,  found  ncar  the  Tibor,  (as  dcsciibed  in  viii.  82,) 

will  indicate  the  place  whcre  Aeneas  shall  build  tlie  new  city. Tibi ;  for 

a  te ;  to  be  joinod  with  invcnta. Secreli  ;  reniote,  solitari/. 391.  Jacc- 

bit ;    shall   appear   lying. 382.    Kati ;    supply  jacehunt. 39C.    Ilas, 

lianc ;  these  coasts,  this  part  of  the  Itahan  shore,  ucar  us,  ou  the  Adriatic 

and  the  gulf  of  Tarentum. 399.  Narycii  Locri ;  a  colony  of  Locrians 

frora  Naryx,  or  Karycium,  opposite  Euboea,  said  to  be  the  followers  of  the 
Oiloian  Ajax,  scttled  on  the  coast  of  Bruttium,  near  the  prcsent  village  of ' 

Motta  di  Burzano.     They  were  also  called  the  Loci:i  Epizephyrii. 490. 

Saileutiuos.     The  Sallcntine  fields,  bctwcen  the  Tarentinc  gulf  and  the  Adri- 

atic,  arc  now  the  T(rra  di  Otranto,  or  district  of  Otranto. Milite ;  sol- 

diery ;  collcctive,  as  ii.  495. 401.  Lyctins  ;  Lyctian ;  from  Lyctus,  a  towu 

in  Cretc. Idomciicns,  on  bcing  drivon  from  Crcte,  (8ce  121,  122,)  scttlcd 

in  the  soutlicastern  part  of  Italy. Dacis  Mcliboci ;  Philoctetes,  a  com- 

paniou  of  Hcrcules,  on  returning  froni  Troy  to  Meliboca,  his  native  city  in 
Thessaly,  was  driven  away  by  a  sedition  of  the  people,  and  settlcd  iu  the 
little  town  of  Peteha,  near  the  modern  Strongoli  in  Eruttium,  which  he 

fortified  with  a  wall. 402.  Piiiloctctac  limits  muro. Snbnisa  ;  resting 

on,  sustained;  i.  e.  defended  by. 403.  Stctcrint ;  shall  have  bcen  moored. 

404.  In  litorc.     The  shore  wlicre  the  first  lauding  shall  be  niade  in 

Italy.     This  proved  to  be  on  the  Japygian  promontory,  near  tlic  temple  of 

Mincrva,  as  we  find  bclow,  531. 405.   Velarc ;   impcrative  passive ;   be 

veiled,  cover  thy  hcad.  Comp.  ii.  707.  This  was  thc  custom  of  thc  Romans, 
whcn  sacrificing;  only  the  face  l)cing  lcft  uncovcrcd.     Thc  Crccks  did  not 

veil  thc  hcad  on  such  occasions. -Conias,  Grcok  accusative,  modifies  vclarc 

■ 406.  Ne  qna.    Sec  on  311. luter  sauctcs  igncs;   amidst  the  holy 

fires;  \.  e..  during  tlie  holy  sacrificcs. 407.  Ilostilis  liicics ;  adversc  appear- 

ance  ;  that  is,  the  sight  of  any  inauspicious  object,  which  would  vitiate  the 
oraens  {turhct  omina')  asccrtaincd  by  inspccting  the  victim,  rendering  thcm 

cither  unavailing  or  evil. 409.  Casti ;  iov  pii ;  as  Ilor.  Carm.  Saec.  42, 

C'a.'(tas  Aencas. Rcligionc  ;  rcllgious  cu.sto?».     This,  like  many  othcr  pas- 

Bages  in  tlic  Acncid,  is  intcndcd  to  roawaken  in  the  Romans  a  rcvcrcncc  for 
Ihcir  nncierit,  coroniniiios,  by  rpforrin|r  fhom  to  fo  high  an  origin. 110. 


BOOK    THIRD. 


425 


Digressnm ;  having  departed;  i.  e.  after  you  shall  have  left  that  first  landing 

place  in  Italy. Orae  ;  for  the  case,  conip.  above,  131. 111.  Angnsti, 

in  prose,  would  agree  with  claustra. Sarestent ;  fihall  bec/in  to  open  (to 

the  view.)  The  shores  of  the  straits  when  seen  at  a  distance  do  not  appear 
to  present  any  opeuiug;  but  as  you  approach  they  begin  to  withdraw  from 
each  other.     Rarus  is  said  of  objects  separated  from  each  other  by  some 

intervening  space ;  as,  the  threads  of  a  nct,  rara,  retia. Cianstra ;  for 

fretum. Pelori ;  Pelorus.     The  Sicilian  promontory  at  the  northern  ex- 

tremity  of  the  straits  of  Messina,  now  Capo  di  Faro. 412.  Lacva.     Turn 

to  the  south,  or  left,  instead  of  going  through  the  straits  to  the  north,  and 

on  your  right,  as  you  face  the  east  coast  of  Sicily. 415.  Tantnm  valet 

mntare  ;  has  so  much  power  to  change  things  ;  can  effcct  such  changcs. 

416.  Dissilnisse  ;  to  have  burst  asunder. Fernnt ;  theg  report.     There  ap- 

pears  to  have  been  a  tradition  that  Sicily  was  torn  from  Italy  by  a  violent 
subterranean  convulsion,  and  another  that  the  original  isthmus  was  severed 
by  the  force  of  the  great  mass  of  waters  alone.  Virgil  seems  to  have  both 
these  causes  in  mind.— Protenns ;  join  with  una ;  continuoushj  one. 

417.  Medio;  ablat.  for  in  medimn ;  came  between. 419.  Litore.     Ileyne 

says  that  litore  is  put  here  for  rnari ;  giving  the  rather  singular  reason,  that 
"  where  there  is  a  sea  there  is  a  shore.''''    If  so,  ripa  might  be  used  for  flu- 


Scylla. 
men,  and  mons  or  collis  for  campus  or  vallis,  for  where  there  is  a  river  there 
is  a  bank,  &c.  In  the  sense  of  7nari  it  is  the  means  of  diductas.  Biit  the 
idea  of  the  water  separating  the  lands  is  alrcady  expressed  in  venit  medio, 
undis  latus  abscidit,  and  arvaque  tirbes  intcrluit.  If  litore  be  taken  as  an 
ftblative  of  siluation,  {on  the  shore,)  we  may  rcgard  diductas  as  a  sensus 


426  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

pracgnans,  nieaning  not  only  scparatcd  but  standing.  Witli  this  interpreta- 
tion  translate  diductas  litore  ;  standiyig  apart,  or  divided  and  standing,  on 
the  shore.     Tlie  singular  numbcr,  litore,  in  tbis  case,  like  capite,  ii.  219,  ia 

for  the  plural. AngnstO  acstu  ;  ablat.  of  inanncr  aftcr  interluit ;  teith  a 

narroto  flood. 420.  Scylla,  now  Sciglio,  on  the  Italian  side  of  the  strait, 

is  a  lofty  rock,  surrouiided  by  smallcr  rocks,  producing  a  great  tumult  and 

roaring  of  waves,  described  in  the  fable  as  the  barking  of  dogs. Cliary!»- 

dis,  at  the  point  corresponding  to  the  modcrn  Cohforo,  is  a  whirlpool,  or 
violent  commotion  of  the  Avaves,  which  is  most  noticeable  when  southcrly 
winds  force  a  grcat  niass  of  waters  into  the  strait,  and  against  tlie  Sicilian 

shorc. 422.  In  abrnptnni ;  for  praeccps  ;  headlong. 426.  Priuia  homi- 

nis  facies ;  the  vpper  part  (literally,  yo?VH)  (is  that)  of  a  hMinan  helng. 

427.  Postrema;   supply  facies;    the  lower  part  is  a  sea  inonster. 428. 

Ddphiunm — iDpornm  \  joined  as  to  the  tails  of  dolphins  to  the  womb  of 

wolves ;  having  the  tails  of  dolphins  joined  to  the  womb  of  wolves. 

Lnpi  is  substituted  here  for  canes.     Sce  432. 429.  Praestat ;  it  is  better. 

Comp.  i.  135. Metas  •,  properly  the  goal,  or  turning  point,  in  the  circus 

or  racc  course  ;  here  for  promontory. Pachyni  ;    Pachynnw,  thc  south- 

eastern  point  of  Sicily,  now  callcd  Capo  Passaro. 430.  CircnniSectere ; 

a  term  also  borrowod  froni  the  circus. 432.  Gscrnieis ;  dark ;  as  in  64. 

433,  434.  Vati  si  qna  fides  ;  if  fhe  prophet  dcscrves  ang  covfidcnce. 

435.  Pro  oninibns;  for,  in  place  of,  all  other  things ;  one  thing  to  be  ob- 
servcd,  evcn  if  all  others  are  neglected.  *  Obscrve  the  emphatic  positions  of 

unum. 437.  Prininm ;  /?rsi  of  all ;  before  all  other  deities.     Comp.  v. 

540. 438.  Cane  vota.     Vows  are  expressed  in  the  rhythmical  form,  or 

chant,  common  to  all  religious  formulas. 439.  Victor,  because  he  will 

have  overcome  all  difficulties. 440.  Fines,  for  adfincs. Mittere  ;  thou 

wilt  be  conveycd. 442.  DiTinos  lacns.     Sce  on  386. Silvis  ;  ablat.  of 

cause.  The  lake  was  only  about  a  mile  and  a  half  in  circumference,  and 
nemmed  in  with  woods.  See  vi.  238.  Hence  it  may  be  said  to  resound 
icith  woods.     At  present,  Iiowcvcr,  the  hills  round  lake  Avernus  arc  ncarly 

destitute  of  trees. 443.  Insauam  ;  inspircd. 444.  IVotas  et  nomina ; 

lctters  and  words. 445.  Carmina;  prophecics. 446.  Digerit  iu  nnmer- 

nni ;  places  in  ordcr.     She  arranges  the  Icaves  so  that  the  words  on  them 

form  sentcnces  in  verse. 448.  Eadem  ;  theni;  thc  prophecies ;  object  of 

prendcre. Vcrso  cardine;  the  hinge  being  tvmed;  when  the  hinge  turns. 

T^  door  is  opcncd  whcn  the  Sibyl,  or  those  who  come  to  seek  rcsponscs, 

entcr  tbe  cave  or  retire  from  it. Tennis  vcatns;  a  light  wind ;  •or  li.^ht 

^ust  of  wind. 149.  Jnuna ;    the  door  dlsturbs    ihcm   by  admittiiig  the 

wiud. 150.  Dcinde  ;  thenccforth;  answcring  to  thc  forcgoiiig  yM(?///. 

Cavo  S.1X0 ;  the  same  as  sub  riipe,  443,  aiid  antro,  446. 452.  InconKniti ; 

\ninstructcd ;  without  any  rosiMJiiscs,  since,  whcn  thcy  cntcr,  the  leavcs  are 

so  disturbed  as  to  be  unintelligible. 453.     Ilcre  lct  vot  any  amount  of 

•lelay  {crpcnditurc  of  dclay)  he  of  so  mv.ch  (valuo)  to  you.     Tibi ;  in  your  cs- 


BOOK    THIRD.  427 

timation.     The  subjunctivc  is  for  the  imperative.     Gr.  §  2G0,  R.  C,  2d  para- 

graph;  Z.  §  529. Tauti.     Gr.  §  214;  Z.  §  444. 4.54,  455.  Et  vi  cnr- 

SUS  in  altnni  TCla  VOCet;  and  fhough  your  voyage  iirgentlij  invUe  ijour  saih  to 

the  sea;  the  more  natural  expressiou  would  be  aiira  vela  vocet. Vi,  /8i'7j, 

veliemenfer,  urgently. Sccnudos ;  auspicious  sails ;  for  sails  filled  ivlth  a 

favorable  wind. 456.  Qniu,  so  that  not,  connects  the  dependent  chiuse 

with  ne  fuerint  tanti.     Gr.  §  262,  R.  10,  2 ;  Z.  §  538. 457.  Ipsa  canat ; 

that  she  herself  may  utter  prophecies  ;  ipsa,  in  person  ;  that  she  may  not  in 
tlie  case  of  Aeneas  comniit  lier  prophecies  to  the  uncertain  leaves.  Thc 
subjunctive  depends  on  poscas.     But  in  some  editions  jaoseas  is  separated  by 

arperiod,  and  caMai  is  taken  imperatively. Volcns ;  kindly ;  sna  sponte. 

Quo  niodo  ;  interrogative,  how ;  thc  question  is  dependent  on  expedict ; 

she  will  explain  hoio,  &c. 461.  Liccat.     Gr.  §  264,  1,  (b);  Z.  §  558. 

46^.    Ingentcm;    r.n  instance  of  prolepsis.     The  sense  is:  "Render  Troy 

great  and  glorious  by  your  deeds." 463,  464.  Postqnam — dcbinc ;  like 

quum — tum;    after — thereupon. Dona.     It  was  the  ancient  custom,  as 

•we  learn  both  from  the  Biljle  and  from  Homer,  to  bestow  presents  on  friends 

at  parting. ^Anro  gravia,  etc. ;  heavy  with  gold  and  with  cxit  ivory;  i.  e., 

both  made  and  ornamented  with  gold  and  ivory.     The  final  vowel  oi  gravia 

is  lengthened  here  by  the  ictus. ScctO  clephanto ;  an  expression  borrowed 

from  Odys.  xix.  564. 465.  Stipat  cariuis ;  loads  to  the  ships,  instead  of 

loads  the  ships  with,  carinas  argento,  which  would  be  the  usual  construction. 

See  on  i.  195. 406.  Dodonaeos  Icbctas.     It  was  said  that  bronzc  caldrons 

were  suspended  on  the  oak  trees  of  Dodona,  that  the  priests  might  learn 
the  will  of  Jupiter  and  the  fates  from  the  sounds  produced,  when  the  kettles 
were  struck  against  each  other  by  the  wind.     Dodona  was  in  the  dominiona 

of  Helcnus. 487.  Loricam — ^trilicem.     A  coat,  or  hauhcrk,  of  chain  mail, 

in  which  the  hooks,  or  rings,  fastened  into  each  other,  {co7isertam,')  were  of 
gold,  and  in  three  layers  {triUcem) ;  that  is,  it  was  of  three-ply  golden  chain 
work.     See  Smith's  Dictionary  of  Antiq.,  article  lorica;  and  the  coat  of 

mail  on  page  445. 468.  Coaum  galeac  is  equivalent  to  galeam.     See 

wood-cut  on  page  385. 468.  Neoptolcmi  arma.     See  333,  and  ii.  470. 

469.  Sua.     See  on  i.  461. 470.  Duccs;  attendants,  or  grooms,  for 

the  horses.  Some,  with  Forbiger,  understand  pilots  or  guides  of  the  way ; 
but  Ladewig  quotes  Liv.  xliii.  5,  to  show  that  with  presents  of  horscs, 
grooms  {servos)  were  also  given ;  and  it  would  appcar  from  569  and  690 
that  Aeneas  had  received  no  one  from  Helenus  who  knew  the  waVj-hnd 

could  act  as  a  guide. 471.  Rcmiginm  is  also  a  doubtful  term  hcre.     The 

best  authorities  interpret  it  as  remigis,  rowers ;  others,  rcmos.  Aeneas 
might  need  oarsmen,  as  some  of  the  Ti-ojans  had  been  left  in  Crete,  and 

others  may  have  perished. Socios.     His  old  companions,  as  opposed  to 

remigium  or  remiges,  those  just  added  to  his  company. Armis ;  impFc' 

ments  ;  equipments  of  all  kiiids,  needed  on  the  voyage. 472,  473.  Velis 

aptare;  to  makc  rcady  wilh  sails ;  not/orsails. Jnbcbat  Anchiscs.  Comp. 


428  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

9. 4T5.  Dignate;  dcemcd  wor(/n/  of,  honored  hy.     Gr.  §  162,  17,  (a),  Z. 

§  632,  2d  paragraph;  comp.  i.  312. 47G.    Bis  creptc ;    twice  rescued; 

iiamely,  once  whcn  Troy  was  captured  by  Hercules,  aiid  the  sccond  time 

when  it  was  sacked  by  the  Greeks.     Sce  on  ii.  642. lYT.  Tibl.     Gr. 

§  22S,  3 ;  Z.  §  408. Anscni.ie  ;  genit.  instead  of  nom.  in  apposition. 

Tclins  aftcr  ccce.     See  on  i.  461. Ilanc  arripc  \t'As',  kasten  to  tliis  uith 

ihe  aid  of  your  sails. 478.  Praeterlabare ;  snpply  ut,  after  necesse  est. 

480,  481.  Quid  nltra  provclior  ;  v'h;i  aia  I  hurried  toofar  (in  discourse)? 

ultra,  i.  c.  quam  opus  esf. 483.  Snbtcnune,  commonly  the  woof  or  cross 

thrcad  of  woven  cloth,  is  here  a  thread  of  gold  wrought  into  the  cloth  in 

figures  embroidercd  by  stitching. 484.  IVcc  cedit  Iionori ;  nor  does  she 

fail  to  shoiv  equal  respect ;  literally,  7ior  docs  she  comc  behind  the  honor ; 
namely,  that  which  Helenus  has  shown  to  the  Trojans.     Others  understand, 

the  honor  due  to  Ascanius.     For  the  form  of  the  chlamys,  see  page  447. 

485.  Tcxtilibns;  woven.  Phrygia  was  famous  for  beautiful  woven  fabrlcs, 
as  well  as  for  embroidery ;  see  our  illustrations  of  dress,  kc.     Articles  of 

both  kinds  are  given  to  Ascanius. 48G.  Et  hacc ;  as  if  she  had  said : 

Helenus  has  made  appropriatc  prescnts  to  your  friends ;  I  make  these  aho 
to  you.  It  does  not  neccssarily  imply  that  Ascanius  has  already  reccivcd 
gifts  from  Helenus,  though  therc  is  nothing  in  the  context  to  forbid  sucli  a 
supposition.     Poctry  does  not  mention  all  particulars  with  the  exactness  of 

a  gazette. 487.  Siut,  testentnr.     Gr.  §  264,  5  ;  Z.  §  567. 489.  Milii 

limits  sttper,  which  is  equivalcnt  here  to  quae  superest ;  the  only  image  that 

survives  to  me.     Super  has  the  force  of  a  present  participle  of  superesse. ■ 

Astyanactis.  On  the  capture  of  Troy  the  Greeks  killed  Astyanax,  the  sor 
of  Andromache  and  Hcctor,  by  casting  him  down  from  the  battlements  oi 

the  city. 490.  Fcrebat.     The  line  is  suggcsted  by  Odys.  iv.  149,  150 

"Such  are  his  feet,  such  his  hands,  his  eyes,  Iiis  head,  his  hair." 491. 

Pnbescerct;  would  be  riroiving  up. 493.  VivitC  fcliccs ;  a  parting  saluta- 

tion,  like  our  farewcll,  but  morc  imprcssivc  bccause  Icss  frcquently  used. 

Qnibns — sna;  whosedcstined{sua)fortune  is  alrcady  achicvcd. Alia  ex 

aliis  in  fata  ;  from  one  adventure  to  another ;  nothing  scttlcd  and  fixcd  like 

that  impliod  inswa. 495.  Parta  (cst) ;  has  bee7i  securcd. 497.  Effigiein 

XantM.    Sce  on  302. 499.  Anspiciis ;  ablat.  abs. Fncrit ;  .'^hall  have 

proved;  fut.  perf.  indicative. Obvia  ;  cxposed  to. 500.  Thybridis,  au 

oldcr  form  for  Tiberis,  limits  vicina.     Gr.  §  222,  R.  2 ;  Z.  §  211.     So  Ilor. 

Sat.  1,  5,  79:  vicina  Trivici  villa. 501.  Data  ;  destined. 503.  Epiro, 

llespcria ;  (situatcd)  in  IJpirus  {a7id)  Jlcsperia ;  referring  to  Kome  and 
Buthrotum.     Hcyne  and  Pccrlkamp  prcfer  the  rending  Epirum,  Jlcsperiam. 

504.  Itraniqnc ;  in  apposition  with  vrbes  ;  we  will  make  our  kindred 

citics  and  ncarly  rclatcd  nations,  in  J^Jpirus,  in  IJcspcria,  ivho  have  the  samo 
iJardiimis  asthcir  progcnitor,  rt«</(havc  cxpericnccd)  </*e  samcforlunes,  both 

onc  Troy  in  spirit. 505.  Mancat — nepotes ;  ht  this  duty  await  our  de- 

tcendants.     Virgil,  according  to  llcyne,  has  in  mind  Iho  dccrcc  of  Augustua, 


BOOK    THIRD.  429 

wbo,  after  the  battle  of  Actium,  B.  C.  31,  built  thc  city  of  Xicopolis  on  thc 
north  side  of  the  Ambracian  gulf,  and  ordered  that  the  Epirotes  Hving  there 
should  bc  treated  by  the  Romans  as  kins-men,  [cognati.) 

506-587.  Aeneas  starts  again  on  his  wanderiii?s.  He  sails  ns  f.ir  nortli  as  the  Ce- 
rannian  promontory,  and  from  thence  cros"5e8  over  to  the  port  of  Vcnns,  (portus  Ve7ie- 
ris,)  on  the  Italian  eidc,  in  Calabria.  After  Bacriflcing,  and  seekiug,  accorUing  to  tho 
dircctions  of  Helenus,  to  propitiate  the  favor  of  Jur.o,  they  regume  their  voyage,  aiid 
pass  by  the  harbor  of  Tarentura,  the  promontory  of  Lacinium,  Cuulon,  Scylhici  um, 
arid  then  come  in  sight  of  the  volcauo  of  Actna,  to  tlie  shores  of  which  they  are  cTri vcn, 
iii  seeking  to  shun  the  terrors  of  Scylla  and  Charybdis.  The  country  about  Aetna  is 
iiihabited  by  the  giant  race  of  Cjxlops.  The  Trojans  pass  a  night  on  the  shore  at  the 
foot  of  niount  Aetna,  and  are  terrifled  by  the  strange  noises  of  the  volcano. 

506t  CeraQDia ;  mountalns  on  the  coast  of  Epirus  north  of  Buthrotum, 

forming  the  promontory  nearest  to  Italy. Jnxta  also  follows  its  case  in 

iv.  255. 50T.  Italiani.     See  i.   2. 508.  Rnit ;  sefs ;   contrary  to  the 

signification  of  the  same  word  in  ii.  250. 510.  Sortili  renios;  ofter  as- 

slgning  the  oars  by  lot ;  i.  e.  the  duty  of  watching  on  board  the  ships. 
Some  having  bcen  thus  detailed,  the  rest  sleep  on  the  shore  uutil  dawn ;  or 
perhaps  the  meaning  is:  they  determined  by  lot  which  body  of  mcn  should 
be  ready  to  take  the  oars  when  the  signal  should  be  given  at  midiiight  to 
commence  the  voyage  across  the  gulf.     Otherwise,  Ladewig  suggests,  there 

might  be  disorder  and  delay. 511.   Corpora  cnramas ;   we  refresh  our 

bodies.     Comp.  viii.  607. Irrigat ;  pervades;  as  i.  692. 512.  Ngx  horis 

acta.  Xight  is  conceived  of  as  a  goddess  riding  through  the  sky  in  a  chariot 
conducted,  like  the  god  of  day,  by  the  hours,  which  are  also  personified. 

See  further,  v.  '721. 51T.  Oriona.     Seeoni.  535;  on  the  quantity,  Gr. 

§  287,  exc.  in  o,  2.     For  thc  spondaic  verse,  see  Gr.  §  310. 518.  Cancta 

CCnstarc  ;  that  all  things  are  tranquil ;  constare  is  like  the  English  "  scttled," 

applied  to  the  weather. 519.  Signnm ;   probably  given  by  a  trumpet. 

Comp.  239.  Some  understand,  by  a  torch ;  which,  however,  would  hardly 
be  appropriate  here,  where  a  sleeping  camp  is  to  be  aroused  at  midnight. 

522.  namliem ;  it  appears  low  because  distant  in  the  horizon,  •procul. 

In  fine  ^-eathnr  it  is  possible  to  see  entirely  across  the  Adriatic  from  Otranto 

to  Albania. 527.  In  pnppi ;  he  stands  near  the  image  of  the  tutclar  god 

in  the  hinder  part  of  the  ship.     Ile  prays  to  all  the  great  gods,  for  all  eithox 

directly  or  indirectly  can  infiuence  the  winds  and  the  sea. 528.     The 

genitives  are  goverued  \)\ potentes. 529.  Ferte ;  afford. Yento ;  ablat. ; 

means  oi  facilem. Secnndi.     Comp.  sitbitae,  225. 530.  CrebrC:Cnut; 

blow  fresh. Portns.      The  harbor  meant  by  Virgil  is  probably  portus 

Veneris,  now  Forto  Bodisco  or  Porto  di  Vudisca,  about  six  miles  south  of 

nydruntum,  the  modcrn  Otranto. 531.  In  arcc  ;  on  a  heighf.     The  tem- 

ple  of  Miuerva,  built  by  Idomeneus,  was  on  a  summit  overlooking  the  har- 
bor,  and  from  a  distance  appeared  to  be  near  the  shorc.  But  as  they 
approached,  the  lower  grounds  betwcen  this  summit  and  the  water  gradual- 
ly  camc  in  sight,  and  thus  the  temple  seemed  to  rcccde  {refugere)  from  the 


430  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

shorc.     Castnt7H  Minervac,  now  Casfro,  was  some  four  miles  south  o{  Porto 

Bodlnco. 533.  Ab  Enroo  fladn;   (sheltcrcd) /rom  thc  eastcrn  wave ;  nh 

does  not  denotc  agcney  liere.     Tlie  harbor  is  curved  into  the  form  of  a  bow, 

rctiring  iuland  from  the  east. 531.  Cantes;  cliffs,  or  rocky  promontorics 

at  each  extrcmity  of  the  harbor;  thcse  break  the  forcc  of  the  waves,  and 
also  conceal  the  harbor  itself,  {ijisc  latct.)  They  are  the  points  of  two 
ridgcs  of  towering  rocks  {turriti  scopuli)  which  run  out  into  tlie  sea,  on 

either  side  in  two  natural  walls,  or  moles. 535.  Gcmino  dcmittnnt  brachia 

Qinro  5  scnd  down  tlieir  arins  in  two  similar  walh;  muro,  for  muris.     Comp. 

ii.  219. 537.  Priiiinm  omen  5  &&  i\\e  first  augicry.     Comp.  i.  442. 539. 

Observe  the  antithcsis  between  bellum  portas,  and  hospita. 540.  IJello ; 

dativc,  as  in  ii.  315. Armcnta  and  (Jnaiirnpedcs ;  here  mcrely  varled  ternis 

foT  cqni  ~ 511.  Olim  ;  sometlmes. Cnrrn,  for  c'«nv«'.— — 512.  Jngo,  for 

suh  jugo. 513.  Et ;  aho;  a  token  of  peace  as  well  as  of  war. 511. 

Prima.  Pallas  happened  to  be  the  first  deity  whom  they  were  called  upon 
to  worship  in  Italy,  as  her  shrine  was  the  first  that  presented  itself.     Thus 

she  seems  to  be  the  first  of  tlie  gods  to  greet  them. 515.  Capita ;  as 

to  our  heads;  Greek  accusative. 516.   Pracf eptis ;  according  to  the  in- 

structions.     See  436  sq.     For  the  case,  see  Gr.  §  249,  ii. Maxinia ;  as 

the  most  important.     Seo  on  i.  419. 547.  Adolcmns.     Comp.  i.  "704. — 

518.  Ordine,  for  riie  or  de  more ;  each  ceremony,  attending  the  sacrifice, 

bcing  performed  in  its  proper  order  as  well  as  manner. Votis  ;  sacrifices. 

519.  Obvertimns;  suppl}^ /)c/«^o  ;  ive  tum  the  //orns  (or  extremities)  o/ 

the  sail  covercd  yard-arms  (towards  the  sea.)    Comp.  vi.  3. 550.  Gra.jnge- 

nnm.     See  398  sqq. ^^\,  Mint',  then,  next. llercnlci.     One  tradition 

ascribcd  the  founding  of  Tarentiun  (now  Taranto)  to  Taras,  son  of  Ncptunc  ; 
anothcr  to  Ilercules ;  and  still  anothcr  to  Phalantus,  a  descendant  of  Ilercu- 

les. 552.  Diva  Lacinia.     The  tcmple  of  Juno  Lacinia,  one  column  of 

wliich  is  still  stauding,  was  on  the  promontory  of  Lacinium  in  Bruttium,  six 
miles  Eoutli-east  of  Croton.     From  its  ruins  lias  becn  constructed  the  mole 

of  the  modcrn  Croton  or  Crotone. Contra ;  opposite  to  the  Tarentine 

shorc.     The  Lacinian  promontory  is  now  called  Capo  delle  colonne,  or  Capo 

^au. 553.  Canlonis ;   Caulon,  or  Caulonia,  now  Castro  Vctere,  or  Castcl 

Vetere. Sf  jlafcnm,  now  Sqnillace,  was  also  in  thc  Crotonian  district  of 

Bruitium.  Scylaccuin  is  situated  on  an  almost  inaccessiblc  rock,  which  ad- 
vanccs  into  thc  sea  in  a  bold  and  prccipitous  promontory,  from  whicli  thc 
town  derived  tlie  name  of  Navifragum  Sci/laccwu.      See  5Iurriiy's  Hand 

Book  of  Soutiiern  Italy. 551.    Tnni ;    thcn ;    aftcr  having  coasted  thc 

southern  extrcmity  of  Italy,  and  doublcd  Cape  Spartavcnto,  they  comc  in 

eight  of  Actna. E  flactu  (crnitnr  ;  i.s  tcen  out  of  the  sed;  that  is,  far  off 

ou  the  sea,  and  rising  tiicrefroni.     So  Tacit.  Ann.  3,"1 :  H.c  allo  viseC  classis. 

556.  Voccs ;  soiinds ;  roaring  of  the  waves  brokcn  on  tlie  shore. ■ 

558.  Mmirnm  ;  doubthss. Ilaec — illa;  this  certainly  is  that  Charybdis; 

tliat,  namcly,  wlilcli  Ilelcnus  dcscribcd  to  us. 559.  Canebat.    Sce  420  sq. 


BOOK    THIRD.  431 

560i  Eripite;  rcscue  yourselves. Reinis>    See  ou  207. 561.  ic; 

than;    as  in  236. Rndentcm ;    roarijKj ;    describes  the  noise  niade    b}- 

the  water  as  the  prow  rushes  through. 563.  Ventis ;  less  prosaic  herv- 

than  velis  would  have  been. 565.  Ad  niaues ;  a  bold  figure  to  signiiv 

down  to  th^very  bottom. Desedimns ;  we  have  sunk ;  we  are  alrtady 

in  the  lowest  depths.     TJiis  reading  has  better  authority  than  desidlmus,  or 

descendimus. 566.    Clamorem ;    a  rcsounding  echo.     Clamor,  voces,  aiid 

ge^nitus,  are  all  applied  here  to  the  noise  of  waves. Inter  cava  saxa.    The 

waves  resounded  successively  as  they  were  received  into  the  depths  of 
Charybdis,  and  they  were  then  thrown  back  rapidly,  dashed  up  in  clouds  of 
spray,  that  seemed  to  bedew  the  very  stars.  This  accords  with  the  de- 
scription  given  by  Helcnus  above,  421-423 ;  and  something  siniilar  may  be 
observed  in  any  cavernous  rock  ou  the  sea-shore,  so  situated  and  so  capa- 

cious  as  to  take  in  several  successive  waves. 56T.  Elisam;  dashed  fortk. 

Rorantia  astra ;  the  stars  dropping  dew.     The  expression  is  bold,  but 

justified  by  the  appearance  of  objects  at  the  moment. 568.  Eeliqnit ; 

has  lcft.  Thi^  action  precedcs  allabimnr.  We  float  to  the  shores  of  the 
Cyclops,  after  we  have  been  deserted  both  by  suu  and  wind.  Comp.  131. 
Jhe  Cyclops  were  giants  of  Sicily,  and  dcscribed  by  Homer  in  the  9th  Book 
of  the  Odyssey,  as  dwelliug  in  the  western  part,  and  not  as  Virgil  represents 

them,  ih  the  neighborhood  of  Aetua. 570,  5T1.  Et  ingens  ipse  ;  and  it- 

self  capacious.  So  far  as  regards  the  haven  itself  it  is  capacious  and  safe  ; 
but  the  noises  and  fires  of  the  neighboring  mountain  suggest  danger. 
"  Eruptions  of  Aetna  occurred  in  VirgiFs  time,  but  not  in  the  age  of  Homer, 
though  they  would  seem  to  have  occurred  previous  to  the  age  of  Homer." 

Heyne. 571.  Rninis ;  commotions.     The  sounds  heard  indicate  the  de- 

structive  forces  raging  within. 572.  Prornmint;  used  transitively  ;  bekh- 

es  forth. 573.  Tnrbinc  fnmaatem,  etc. ;  smoking  in  a  volmne  of  pitvhij 

blackness,  and  (mingled)  u-ith  glowing  ashes. 576,  577.  Liqnefacta— imo. 

This  passage  dcscribes  the  accumulating  aud  boiling  over  of  the  lava.  Sub 
auras  is  not  high  into  the  air,  but  simply  up  into  the  open  air  as  opposed  to 
the  inner  depths  of  the  mountain.     Glomerat  is  not  Uke  erigit,  casts  aloft, 

but  rolls,  gathers  up,  at  the  mouth  of  the  crater. 578.  Encehidl.     En- 

celadus  was  one  of  the  giant  brothers  who  had  warred  against  Jupiter,  and 
were  struck  with  lightniug  and  buried  under  volcanic  mountains  such  as 
Aetna  and  Stromboli,  the  fires  of  which  were  supposed  to  proceed  from  the 

mouths  of  these  monsters. Scmlnstnm ;  scanned  here  as  a  trisvllabJe, 

seni-yus-tum. 579.  Insnper.     Comp.  i.  61. 580.  Flammam  expirare',, 

etc. ;  that  huge  Aetna  jilaced  above  (him)  emits  the  flame  (of  the  giant)y,-owi 

its  broken  cavities.-. Caminis  ;  the  crevices  and  cavities  of  the  mountain. 

582.  Snbtexere ;  ovcrsprcads.     The  subject  is  Triaacriam,  though  we 

should  bave  expected  Aetnam. 583.  Monstra ;  prodigies;  terrific  phe- 

nomena;  the  internal  uoi.ses  of  the  volciiuo,  which  the  Trojans  do  not  coie'. 
prcheud. 587.  Intemposta  ;  dark,  wipropitious. 


432  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

588-654.  In  thc  morning  tlie  Trojans  diecover  a  strangcr,  haggard  and  squalid  in 
fc,ppearance,  approacbing  the  sliips  froni  the  ■woods.  Uo  describes  himEelf  as  a  follow- 
er  of  Ulj'sgcg,  lately  descrtcd  by  his  companions,  wlion  they  had  fled  in  haste  from  the 
island,  after  escaping  from  the  cavo  of  the  Cyclops,  Polyphemns.  Tlie  cave  of  Polyphe- 
mus,  and  his  bloody  feasts,  are  described  by  Achemcnides,  the  strangei-. 

588.  Primo  Eoo  ;  at  thc  frst  dawn  ;  ablat.  of  timc. 590.  M.lfle  COB- 

fecta  snprema  ;  icastcd  with  cxtreme  hunr/er.     Macle  is  tho  effect  put  for  tlie 

cmsc,  fame. 591.  Cnltn  refers  to  his  clothing  and  extcrual  appcaran^-o. 

■ 593.    Re$]<icimns  ;    ik  look  agaln  and  ar/ain. Immissa ;    loi^f,   nn- 

trimmed.     With  the  nominatives  supply  erajit  illi. 594.  Tegnmen,  for 

vestis  ;  he  had  (tattered)  garments  fastened  together  wiih  thorns. Cctcra ; 

asfor  the  rest  he  was  a  Greek.  Apart  from  his  squalid  appearance,  the  oth- 
er  indications  of  dress  and  equipment  proved  that  he  was  a  Grcelc,  and  we 

inferred  that  he  had  been  engaged  in  the  Trojan  war. 598.  Continuit ; 

chcckcd. 599.  Testor ;  equivalent  to  prccor ;  I  implorc. 600.  Lnmen, 

for  aera. 601.    Tcrras,  for  ad  terras.     See  on  i.  2. 602.  Scio  is  a 

monosyllable  liere  by  synaeresis ;  pronounccd  sho ;  the  verb  is  found  so  con- 

tracted  in  sevcral  examples  quoted  by  Ramshorn,  §  220,  4,  b. 605. 

Spargite  ;  equivalent  to  me  discerptum  dispergite  ;  tear  me  in  picces  and  cast» 

me. 606.  Pereo  retains  its  final  vowel  before  hominum,  witlrout  shorten- 

ing  it. Honiinnm  ;   empliatic;    ofmen;    of  hnman  bcings;    not  by  the 

haiids  of  monstcrs  like  Polyphemus. 60T.  Genibns ;  dative  after  haerebat. 

Comp.  iv.  73.     Both  the  dative  and  ablative  are  uscd  after  this  verb. 

Volntans ;  supply  se ;  prostrating  himsclf. 808,  609.  Fari,  fateri ;  for 

the  infinitive  after  hortari,  comp.  13-1  and  ii.  Tl.     For  the  diffcreuce  bc- 

tween  the  interrogatives  qui  and  qnis,  see  Dictionary. Dcinde  belongs 

to  hortamur  understood.     It  docs  not  ahvays  stand  at  the  begintiing  of  its 

clausc.     See  i.  195. Agitet;  is  (now)  pursuing  hiin. 610.  Mnlta  ;  ad- 

verb  ioT  multuin.     Comp.  i.  465,  and  note. 611.  Pracsenli ;  s^tre  ;  given 

in  person,  and  so  reliable.     Tlie  pledge  is  the  giving  of  thc  right  hand. 

613.  Ulixi;  for  the  form  of  the  genitive,  see  ou  i.  30. 614.  Nonien ; 

supply  est. Genitore — panpere;   my  father  Adamastus  being  poor  ;  de- 

notes  the  reason  why  Achemenides  had  engaged  in  the  Trojan  war.     Othera 

make  genitore  the-ablative  aftcr  «a^w.?  understood. 615«  FortnBa ;  the 

wish  is  suggested  by  the  mention  of  his  father's  poverty. 6!6.  frndolia 

limina ;  scveral  of  his  conipauions  had  becn  killcd  and  devourcd  by  tho 
Cyclops,  Polyphcmus,  who  had  confined  tlie  wholc  party  in  his  cave,  until 
thcy  escaped  through  the  artifice  of  Ulysscs.  But  the  adventure  of  Ulysscs 
took  place,  according  to  Ilomcr,  several  years  before  the  time  assigned  by 

Virgil  to  the  arrival  of  Acneas  in  Sicily. Linqnnnt;   thc  present  after 

dum,  in  the  scnsc  of  while,  wherc  we  shouM  use  the  past.     This  usage  \a 

frcquent.    Gr.  §  259,  K.  1,(1),  (a) ;  Z.  §  507. 618.  Domns  sanic  dapibnsqne 

Cltientis;  the  house  of  blood  and  of  gorg  fcasts.  Thiel  and  Forbiger  agrce  in 
inaking  this  a  limiting  abhitivc  of  quality ;  Gr.  §  211,  Tl.  6 ;   Z.  g  471; 


BOOK   THIRD.  433 

though  the  omission  of  the  adjeetive  with  sanie  ia  very  harsh. 619. 

Ipse ;  Polyphemus.     Comp.  i.  40. 621.   Nec  Tisu,  etc. ;   he  can  neither 

be  looked  at  nor  spoken  to  without  terror. 624.  Eesnpinns ;  stretched 

along  on  his  hack. 627.  Tepidi.     Some  manuscripts  give   trepidi. 

629.  — Te  continues  the  force  of  the  foregoing  negative,  nec. 630.  Simnl, 

iov  simul  atque ;  as  soon  as. 631.  Per,  denotes  extension,  and  is  sug- 

gested  by  the  euormous  length  of  the  giant's  body. 633.  Per  somiinia  ; 

join  with  eructans. Jlcro.    Tlie  wine  was  given  to  him  by  Ulysses.     The 

story  is  narrated  in  the  9th  Book  ©f  the  Odyssey,  182-542. 634.  Soititi 

Ticcs ;  having  determined  our  parts  hy  lot ;  i,  e.  the  parts,  niore  or  less  dau- 

gerous,  which  each  should  take  in  the  transaction. 635.  Telo.     The  in- 

strument  used  was  a  sharp-pointed  stake  or  tree. 636.  Solnm.     Ile  had 

one  eye  of  circular  form,  in  size  and  shape  like  a  Grecian  shield,  or  the  disc 

of  the  sun,  lurking  undcr  his  shaggy  brow. 63T.  Plioebeae  lampadis  ;  tlie 

sun.     Comp.  iv.  6. Instar;  Gr.  §  94;  it  is  in  apposition  with  quod.    See 

ArnoId's  Lat.  Pr.  207. 641.  Qnalis  refers  to  his  appearance  and  his  fea- 

tures,  qnantns  to  his  size. 642.  Clandit  and  press.it,  in  immediate  con- 

uection  with  the  relatives,  are  much  livelier  than  if  he  had  said,  qualis  et 

quantus  est  Polyphemus  qui  claudit  atque  pressat. 643.  VnlgO  ;  here  atid 

there;  all  around.     Comp.  vi.  283. 645.  Tertiajam — complent.    Already 

the  moon  is  coming  to  the  full  for  the  third  time;  the  third  horns  arejilling 

themselves. 616.  Qnnm,  iu  the  sense  of  since,  an  adverb  of  time,  is  fol- 

lowed  by  the  indicat.  present.     Arnold's  Lat.  Pr.  488,  d,  (1),  and  490,  (d). 

Deserta ;   soUtary. 647.   Ab  rnpe  ;   the  situation  of  the  Cyclops ; 

{tovi Qvmg)  from  the  rocks.  Thus  Heyne  interprets.  8^^655,675.  The  ab- 
lative,  with  or  without  the  preposition  in  these  examples,  thus  denotes  the 
situation,  not  of  the  spectator,  but  of  the  object  seen,  as  in  554,  on  which 
comp.  note.     Homer  speaks  of  the  Cyclops  as  dwelling  on  the  summits  of 

lofty  mountains,  Od.  ix.  113. 651.  Primnm.    He  has  been  continually  on 

the  look-out  for  ships,  and  now/or  thefirst  time  he  has  seen  a  fleet  approach- 

ing  the  shore,  and  that  is  this  fleet  of  the  Trojans. 652.  Qnaecnmqne 

fnisset ;  tvhatever  it  should  prove  to  be,  I  resolved  to  give  myself  2ip  to  it. 
Fuissct  serves  as  a  future  perfect  subjunctive  after  t\\G  past,  addixi.  At  the 
niomeut  when  he  made  the  resolution  his  form  of  expression  would  have 

been  addicam,  quaecutnque  fuerit. 654.  PotittS ;    rather  than  leave  me 

to  be  destroyed  by  the  Cyclops. 

655-681.  Polj-pliemus,  •who  has  beun  deprivod  of  his  eye  by  the  artful  Ulysses,  dc- 
eeends  to  the  shore  to  wash  the  blood  from  the  eocket.  He  overhears  the  Trojans  as 
they  attempt  to  sail  away,  and  pursues  them  far  into  the  water,  and  then  uttors  loud 
crles  whieh  call  forth  all  his  giant  brethreu.  They  stand  about  on  the  hills  casting 
threatening  looks  in  vain  at  tho  Trojans,  who  are  already  beyond  their  reach. 

658.     Observe  the  ponderous  Hne  adapted  in  sound  to  the  object  de- 

scribed. Tronca  mann  pinns  j  a  lopped  off  pine  tree  in  his  hand. 

Regit  et  ilrmat ;  guidcs  and  assures  ;  he  feels  his  way  with  it  along  the  de- 
19 


434  NOTES   ON    THE    AENEID, 

clivities  and  rocks. 660.  Ea.     Gr.  §  206,  8 ;   Z.  §  372. 662.  Ad  ac- 

qaora  ;  to  the  opeii  sea ;  the  expression  merely  elaboratcs  the  idea  contained 
in  altos  fluctus.     Some,  however,  take  the  line  as  an  example  of  hysteron 

proteron.     Gv.  §  323,  4,  (2). 663.  Inde, /jw?i  thetice,  refers  to  aequora; 

he  washes  it  with  the  water  dipped  with  his  hand  from  the  sea. 664. 

Gcmitn,  for  et  gemens  ;  corap.  ii.  323 ;  it  denotes  thc  manner  of  the  act  ex- 
pressed  in  the  whole  plirase,  dentihus  infrendens  ;  while  dcntihus  itself  is  the 

manner  of  infrendens. 666.  Inde  ;  of  place. Celcrare  ;  historical  in- 

finitive. 667.  Sic ;  having  thus  deserved;  namely,  so  as  to  be  received 

into  our  ships.    Thus  WunderlJch,  Jahn,  and  others. 668.  Et  proni,  etc. ; 

and,  bending  forivard  we  turtt  the  zvaters. 669.  Vocis.     Comp.  5oi5.     It 

refers  here,  according  to  Heyne,  to  the  noise  of  the  oars ;    according  to 

others  to  the  voice  of  the  sailors. 671.   lonios ;   lonian  appHes  morc 

strictly  to  the  sea  farther  east  than  the  SiciHan  coast ;  but  hcre  includes  all 

between  Sicily  and  Greece. Acqnarc  scqacndo ;   to  equal  the  waves  in 

speed;  or,  to  overtake  those  who  are  borne  on  the  swift  waves. 673. 

Pcnitns ;  deep  or  far  within  the  island. 676.     Observe  the  verbs  here, 

one  in  thc  singular,  and  the  othcr  in  the  plural.     See  Gr.  §  209,  R.  11,  2. 

678.  CoclO,  for  ad  coelum. 679.  QnalCS ;  ax  the  oak  trees  (are  which) 

stand. 680.  Aeriac ;  lofti/. 681.  Constitcrnnt.    Gr.  §  307,  (1).    The 

perfect  of  this  verb  is  often  used  as  a  present.  The  oak  was  sacred  to  Ju- 
pitcr,  the  cypress  to  Proscrpine,  or  Ilccate,  the  Diana  of  Hadcs. 

682-715.  They  leave  the  shores  of  the  CyclopB,  and  coaeting  by  the  mouth  of  the 
river  Pantagia,  the  towns  of  Megara  and  Thapsus,  the  bay  of  Syracuse,  in  which  ia 
eituated  tlie  island  of  Ortygia  w'ith  its  founlaia  of  Arethusa,  then  by  tho  rivcr  Ilelorus 
and  the  promontory  of  Pachynum,  they  s.ail  westerly  by  Camarina,  Gela,  Mount  Ac- 
ragas,  or  Agrigeiitum,  and  doubling  Lilybaeura,  the  ■western  cape  of  Sicily,  they  arrive 
at  Drcpanum,  where  they  ai'e  received  bj'  king  Acestos,  and  where  Anchises  dies. 

682,  683.  Qnocnmqne  rndentcs  cxcntcre ;  to  unfurl  onr  sails  for  any 
course  whatsoever  ;  litcrally,  to  shake  out  the  ropes  whithersoevcr,  ovforwhat- 
ever  direction.     Comp.  267.      ■  683.  Ventis  secnndis ;  dat. ;   to  the  guiding 

wind^ ;  thc  winds,  to  whatever  course  they  may  bc  favorable. 681-686. 

Jahn,  with  Heyne,  regards  ihesc  verscs  as  probably  interpolatcd.  They  arc 
givcn,  however,  by  all  thc  manuscripts.  Thc  wind  was  boaring  the  flcct  to 
the  nortliward,  and  dircctly  through  the  straits  of  Scylla  and  Charybdis.  The 
warning  of  Ilelenus  is  opposcd  to  this  course,  yet  thc  danger  from  the  Cy- 
clops  secms  at  the  moment  so  much  grcater  than  any  other,  that  they 
rcsolve  to  sail  ivith  the  wi?KZ  (.ff (■«« Jis)  back  towards  the  straits;  but  then 
suddcnly  a  breeze  springs  up  from  tlie  nortli,  and  thus  they  cscape  both  the 

pcrils  of  thc  straits  and  of  the  Cyclops. Itramqne  is  in  apposition  with 

Scylla  and  Charybdis, -w^iich  arc  govcrncd  by  in<cr. Discriniine  parvo  ; 

abhitive  of  description  ;  with  small  dislance  of  death ;  translate  thus:  on 
thc  othcr  hand  the  instruct!o7ix  of  Jlelenus  warn  ihem  7iot  to  hold  their 
"ourscs  betwecn  Scylla  and  Charyhdis,  cach  (whethcr  thcy  go  to  the  right  or 


BOOK    THIRD.  435 

left  of  the  strait)  being  a  way  but  little  distant  from  death. Nl,  for  ne  ;  it 

is  found  thua  in  Prop.  ii.  Y,  3,  and  Sil.  Ital.  i.  374. Dare  lintea  retro  raust 

be  understood  of  their  return  towards;  the  straits. 68T.  Angnsta;  nar- 

row;  because  Pelorus  is  situated  on  the  straita.  By  the  interposition  of  the 
gods  a  wind  is  sent  from  Pelorus,  that  is,  blowing  forth  from  the  strait  of 

Sicily. 688.  Saxo.     See  on  i.  167.     The  Pantagias  flows  into  the  sea  be- 

low  Leontini  between  rocky  banks.  Hence  its  mouth  is  of  natural  rock. 
——689.  Mcgaros ;  the  Megarian  gulf,  north  of  Syracuse,  now  Golfo  di 
Augusta,  named  after  Mcgara,  which  was  planted  near  its  shore  by  the  Do- 

rians,  B.  C.  708. Thapsnm ;  a  level  peninsula,  enclosing  the  Megarian 

gulf  on  the  south  side ;  now  Peninsola  delli  Magnisi  or  Bagnoli. 690. 

Relcgeas  retrorsus ;  coasting  again.  Virgil  conceives  Achemenides  to  have 
come  with  Ulysses  from  the  direction  of  Africa,  and  to  have  approached  the 
coast  of  the  Cyclops  from  the  southem  point  of  Sicily.     He  is  now  sailing 

with  Aeneas  in  the  contrary  direction. Errata  =pererrata ;  which  had 

been  wandered  over. 692.  Sinn,  for  si^iui ;  dative  after  praetenta. 69i. 

Ortygiam.     This  Ortygia  formed  a  part  of  the  city  of  Syracuse. 696. 

Arethasa  ;  a  fountain  on  thc  island  of  Ortygia. 691.  Jnssi ;  commanded ; 

i.  e.  by  Anchises ;  or  perhaps,  without  any  name  understood,  directedby  re- 

ligious  duty. 698.  Exsnpero,  for /)rae<erac/ior  ;  I  sail  by. Helori.  The 

river  Helorus  runs  into  the  sea  a  little  above  the  promontory  of  Pachynum 
with  a  very  gentle  current,  which  is  sometimes  even  rendered  stationary  by 
the  easterly  wind,  so  that  thc  neighboring  lands  are  overflowed  and  fertilized. 

TOO.  Radimns;  we  pass  near  by  ;  literaMy,  we  graze. TOl.  Camarina  ;  not 

the  city  itself,  but  a  lake  near  the  city,  was  forbidden  by  the  oracle  of  Apol- 
lo  to  be  removed.  And  when  the  inhabitants,  on  account  of  pestilence, 
caused  the  lake,  in  spite  of  the  oracle,  to  be  drained,  the  city  was  thus  ex- 
posed  to  its  enemies,  who  passed  over  the  bed  of  the  lake  and  captured  it. 

Geloi ;  so  called  from  Gela,  now  Terra  Nuova,  a  town  named  after  the 

river  Gelas. 702.  Immanis,  wild  or  savage,  is  refcrred  by  Forbiger  to 

fiuvii.  The  Gclas,  according  to  Ovid,  Fast.  iv.  470,  abounded  iu  whirlpools ; 
it  was  personified  on  coins  by  the  figure  of  an  ox  with  a  human  face.  The 
adjective  is  understood,  however,  by  most  editors  to  agree  with  Gela,  and 

then  translated  fierce,  in  reference  to  the  character  of  its  rulers. 703. 

Acragas ;  a  hill  on  which  was  situated  the  splendid  city  of  Agrigentum,  some 
ruins  of  which  are  still  in  existence.     Pindar  has  sung  the  victories  won  iu 

the  Olympic  chariot  races  by  Theron,  one  of  the  Agrigentine  kings. 701. 

Qnsndani ;  sometityies  ;  this  would  seem  to  be  rather  the  rcmark  of  the  poet 

than  of  Aeneas. Datis  vcntis ;  ablat.  abs. ;  favorable  tvinds  being  given. 

Seiinus  (gen. -M?i<i.s-) ;  a  town  on  the  southern  coast  of  Sicily,  mcntioned 

both  by  ancicnt  and  modern  writers  as  reniarkable  for  the  abundance  of 

palm  trecs  in  its  vicinity. 706.  Saxis  cactis  ;  by  reason  of  the  hidden  or 

Bubmerged  rocks  which  run  out  into  the  sea  from  the  promontory  of  Lily- 
baeum,  and  lie  at  the  dcpth  of  about  five  fcct  under  thc  surface,  thc  Lily- 


436  NOTES   ON   THE   AENEID. 

baean  elioals  are  called  hard,  or  rugged.     Lilyhaeum  is  now  Capo  Boco. 

707.   Drepani ;   Drepanum^  now  Brepana. Illaetabilis  \   moumful ;   be- 

cause  Anchises  died  therc  ;  others  refer  it  to  the  glooniy  aspect  of  its  barrea 

coast  and  neighborhood. 711.  Neqaidquam  ;  saved  in  vain ;  because  he 

was  not  suftered  to  see  the  end  of  all  their  wanderings,  and  the  accomplish- 
nient  of  thcir  enterprise.  There  was,  indeed,  a  tradition  that  Ancbises 
actually  lived  to  reach  Italy.  But  the  presence  of  Anchises  at  Carthage 
would  have  been  out  of  keeping  with  the  plot,  and  therefore  he  is  represent- 

ed  as  dying  in  Sicily. 718.  Conticalt  refers  to  the  voice  of  the  speaker 

alone  ;  he  ceased  to  speak;  qnicvit  refers  to  the  task  and  fatigue  of  narrating ; 
he  rested,  having  cnded  the  story. 


BOOK    FOURTH. 


437 


Melpomene,  the  Muse  of  Ti-agedy. 


BOOK  FOUPiTH. 

Dido — lier  love  and  dcatli. 

1-89.  Dido  confides  to  her  ei&ter,  Anna,  tlic  passion  ehe  lias  couceived  for  Aeneig, 
and,  eneouraged  by  her,  she  begins  to  thinlj  of  winning  liim  to  an  alliance  in  marriage  ; 
.ncanwhile  the  public  worlcs  of  Oarthage,  and  the  duties  of  goveri:raeiit,  are  neglected. 

I.  At  denotcs  the  transition  from  the  narrative  of  Acneas  to  that  of  the 

poct,  which  was  interrupted  at  the  end  of  the  first  book. GraTi  fura  J 

wlth   deep  passion. 2.  Saaci:i.      See  i.  719-722. Alit ;  c/ierishes;  not 

%'oluntarily,  for  at  first  she  resists  the  fecling. Carpltar ;  is  coiisttiiml. 

3«  Multa  Tirtas  ;  the  great  heroism ;  mvlta  iniphcs  not  only  the  grcal- 

ness,  but  the  many  proofs  of  his  heroism. Ilonos ;  the  glory  of  liis  family, 

as  spning  from  Jupitcr  and  Venus.     Conip.  12,  and  x.  228. 8.  rnani- 

mam  ;  sympathizing. Malc  sana.    Comp.  ii.  23. 9.  Insomnia;  waking 

tkoughts ;  fivncics  that  keep  one  sleepless. lOt  Quis — liospes;  an  eilip- 


438  NOTES   ON   THE   AENEID. 

tical  cxprcssion,  equivalcnt  to  quis  cst  hic  novus  hospes,  qui  successit? 

11.  Qacin  sese  ore  fcrcns ;  hcarinrj  himself  what  one  infeature  1  i.  e.  present- 

itig  what  a  nohle  countcnance  ! Pcctore  et  armis ;  of  what  brave  soul  and 

deeds  (he  is) !  armis  (from  arma)  being  taken  in  the  sense  of  deeds ;  but 
Ladewig,  Forbigcr,  and  others,  refer  ai-rnis  to  his  bodily  frame,  deriving  it 

from  armus,  and  supplying/orh'6MS,  strong.     Comp.  xi.  644. 12.  Credo  ; 

I  do  indecd  helieve ;  observe  the  emphatic  position  of  the  verb. Genns  ; 

for  j)rolcm,  accusative  after  esse ;   eum,  understood,  is  the  subject ;  that 

he  is  the  progeny. 13.  Degcneres  animos ;  minds  of  ba-se  dcscent.     The 

heroism  of  Aeneas  confirms  his  claim   to   a   divine   origin. Hen  iudi- 

catcs  hcr  deep  sympathy. 14.  Canebat ;  he  described. 15.  Ftxnm  im- 

motnmqnc ;  in  agrcement  -with  the  following  clause,  which  is  the  logical 
subject  of  sederct,  under  Gr.  §  250.     If  it  were  not  resolved  in  my  mind, 

fixed  and  unalterable. 17.  Primns  fefellit ;  my  first  love  (Sychaeus)  de- 

ceived  and  disappointed  me  by  death.  For  the  usage  of  the  participle,  see 
on  i.  69.    After  pertacsnm  supply  7ne.     For  the  genitive  and  accusative  after 

impersonals,  sce  Gr.  §§  215,  229,  R.  6 ;  Z.  §  441. 19.  Potni  snccnmbere  ; 

I  might  have  yieldcd;  the  indicative  expresses  the  couclusion  more  vividly 
tlian  thc  rcgular  form  of  the  apodosis,  potuissem.     Gr.  §  259,  R.  3,  (d) ;  Z. 

§  519,  a.     Thiel  refcrs  this  usage  of  pottci  to  Z.  §  520. Cnlpac.     Loving 

and  marrying  anothcr  aftcr  Sychaeus,  to  hcr  mind,  was  a  fault ;  for  she  had 
resolved  to  remain  true  to  him.  Virgii,  too,  may  be  thinldng  of  the  Roman 
sentimcnt  that  it  was  more  becoming,  aftcr  the  dcath  of  a  first  husband,  to 

remain  in  perpctual  widowhood. 21.  Sparsos  Pcnates  ;  after  the  sprink- 

ling  of  the  household  gods,  or,  after  they  were  sprinliled.     See  Gr.  §  274, 

R.  5 ;  Z.  §  eSY.     On  the  manner  of  the  murder,  see  .i.  347  sq. 22.  Hic, 

refers  to  'Aencas.     The  quantity  here  is  short  as  in  vi.  792.     Sce  Gr.  §  299, 

exc.  2. Liibantcm  ;  an  instance  of  prolcpsis;  he  has  influenced  her  mind 

so  that  it  is  yielding. 24.  Optcm  ;  Gr.  §  260,  R.  6 ;  Z.  §  529 ;  may  I 

choose  rathcr,  let  me  wish  rather. Prins  is  expressed  again  in  a7ite,  27, 

owing  to  the  lcngth  of  the  intcrvcning  passage. 24,  25.  Dchiscsit  and 

adigat  omit  nt  according  to  Gr.  §  262,  R.  4. 26.  Erebi ;  a  god  of  Uades, 

for  Iladcs  itself 29.  Uabcat ;  supply  cos,  refcrring  to  amores ;  let  him 

keep  my  affections. 30.  Sinnm — obortis.     She  falis  upon  the  bosom  of 

her  sister,  and  her  contcnding  emotions  fiiid  rclicf  in  gu.<hing  tcars. 31. 

Refert;  repHes. Lnce  ;  iovquamvita. 32.  Solanc — jnventa;  w^Vi!  <//on 

solitary  in  pcrpctual  youth  (unmarricd  life)  joiwc  aioay  with  gricf?  litcrally, 
be  wasted  away  grieving.  Juventa  is  an  ablative  of  manner,  raodifying  the 
phrase   moerens  carpere  =  moerehis  ct  carpere.     Gr.  §  274,   3,  n.   2,  (b). 

Provc  tlic  tcnse  and  voice  of  carpcre  by  scaiining. 33.  Noris;  future 

perfcct  (novcris)  with  the  sense  of  a  fulurc. 31.  Id.     Dost  thou  hclicve 

that  the  ashcs  (of  Sychacus)  or  (his)  bnricd  manes  carcfor  ihat  ?  uainely, /or 
your  abstaining  from  marriage.  When  you  h.ave  performed  the  due  fuucral 
bonors  to  the  dcad,  thcy  make  no  farther  claim  upon  you,  for  thcn  thcy  are 


BOOK    FOURTH.  439 

at  rest  and  conteutcd. 35.  Esto  ;  he  it  that ;  granted  that ;  refcrring  to 

what  Ibllows. Aegram ;  dcspondhirf ;  mourning  for  Sychaeus. Mariti ; 

hcre  for  suitors. 36.   Libyae  ;   the  genitivo  denoting  origin. Tyro  ; 

an  ablative,  also  denoting  origin  ;  a  Tyro.from  or  of  Tyre ;  equivalent  here 
to  Tyrii.     Lately  not  Libyan  sidtors,  and  formerry,  not  Tyrian  suitors  have 

influenced  her  niind. larbas  ;  Idng  of  a  Numidian  tribe  called  the  Maxi- 

tani. 31,  38.  Trinmphis  divcs;  proUfic  in  triumphs  ;  bccause  it  abouud- 

ed  in  warUke  tribes,  and  chiefs  continually  engaged  in  internal  wars. 

38.  Amori ;  pugno,  hello,  certo,  and  lucior,  talie  the  dative  by  poetic  usage. 

Gr.  §  223,  R.  2,  (b). 40.  G.ictnlae  nrbes ;  the  Gaetuli  dwelt  in  the  coun- 

try  south  of  Numidia.     Some  of  them  retained  their  nomadic  habits,  and 

others  dwelt  ia  villages  composed  of  huts. Gcnns,  in  apposition  with 

urbes,  but  in  sense  rclated  to  Gaetulae ;  as  genus,  i.  339. -41.  Infrcni ; 

riding  without  bridles  ;  termed  also  in  prose  infrenati. Cingnnt ;  hegirt ; 

i.  e.  thec,  or  thy  kingdoni. Inhospita  Syrtis.     Syrtis  major,  and  Syrtis 

minor,  ofic  the  gulf  of  Sydra,  and  thc  other  the  gulf  of  Cabcs,  or  Capos ; 
dangerous  gulfs  aud  quicksands  on  the  northcrn  coast  of  Africa,  hcre  callcd 

inhospitable  on  account  of  the  barbarian  tribcs  in  their  neighborhood. 

42.  Siti,  ablative ;  cause  of  deserta. 43.  Barcaei.     The  people  of  Baroa 

in  the  Cyrenaic  country: Tyro ;  from  Tyre ;  the  idea  of  motion  from  \s 

implied  in  surgentia. Dicam  ;  the  subjunctive  in  a  question  of  appeal. 

Gr.  §  260,  R.  5 ;  Z..  §  530. 44.  Gcrmaniqne  minas ;  added  by  way  of 

epcxegesis,  to  define  more  particularly  the  naturc  of  the  war.     Comp.  i.  361 

sq. 45.  Jnnonc  ;  as  Juno  is  the  guardian  of  Carthage,  if  she  has  favored 

the  coming  of  the  Trojans,  it  must  be  for  some  good  to  her  people.  It 
scems  hardly  probable  that  her  name  should  be  mentioned  herc  simply  be- 
cause  she  is  the  goddess  of  marriage.     For  the  ablat.  see  Gr.  §  257,  R.  7  ; 

Z.  §  645. 19.  Quantis  rebns ;  by  what  achievemenis  will  the  Curthaginiaii 

glory  raise  itsclfl     Comp.  factis,  iii.  462. 50.  Tn,  both  in  the  47th  and 

60th  verses,  is  used  to  impress  the  advice  more  forcibly.     It  is  thus  ex- 

pressed,  says  Thiel,  to  enforce  counsel,  rules,  and  precepts. 51.  Innecte  ; 

devlsc  (from  time  to  time)  causes  for  delay. 52.  Dnm  ;  as  long  as. 

Besacvit;  ragcs;  d^  is  intensive  hcre. 54.  Incensam ;  already  burning. 

55.  Pndorem;  her  shame;    her  regard  for  the  memory  of  Sychaeus, 

which  led  her  at  first  to  look  upon  the  love  of  Aeneas  as  a  violation  of  duty 

and,  hence,  a  cause  of  shame. 56.  Pcr  aras  ;  at  the  altars ;  namely,  of 

the  gods  immediately  mentioned.     For  this  usage  of  per,  sec  on  Hi.  295. 

58.  Legifcrae.     Cercs,  according  to  an   old  poet,   Calvus,   quoted  by 

Servius,  taught  laws,  united  in  marriage  those  who  werc  dear  to  each  other, 

and  luunded  great  cities. 61.  Inter  coruaa  ;  shc  pours  the  libation  betwccn 

the  horns;  thus  consecrating  the  victim.  She  is  occupieJ  l)Oth  in  propiti- 
ating  the  gods  by  sacrifice,  and  in  diviuiug  the  futurc  by  iu.-pecting  eagerly 

the  entrails  {inhians  exta.) 62.  Pixignes,  is  said  of  the  altars  because  of 

thc  nunierous  victims  sacrificed  upon  them. 63.  lastaarat ;  fills  up  ikt 


440 


NOTES    ON    TIIE    AENEID. 


daij  with  offcrinc/s ;  rencws  the  sacrifiecs  throughout  the  day. 64t  Pec- 

toribns  lciigthcns  the  final  syllablc  hcre. Spirantia  ;  palpitating. C6. 

Est,  from  cdo  ;  eat.t,  deuour.^. Molils  flamniaj  the  pleasing  Jirc.     "Wagner 

aud  others  take  mollis  (jnolles)  \n  the  accusative  plural  agreeing  with  medul- 
las,  regarding  mollis  as  incompatible  with  Jlamma,  which  is  put  here  for 
passion.  Molles  then  signifies  pcnetrable.  Ladewig  quotes  Catullus,  43, 
16 :  Ignis  mollibus  ardet  in  medullis.     The  sense  then  would  be :  the  Jlame 

(of  lovc)  devours  the  yielding  marrow. 68,  69.  Tota  nrbe.     Gr.  §  254,  R. 

2,  (b);  Z.  §  482. Qnalis — arnndo  ;  such  as  the  hind,  which,  hccdless,  th-e 

shephcrd  having  sped  his  arrow  while  pursuing  tvith  his  toeapons,  has  irans- 
Jixed  Jrom  ajar  in.  the  Cretan  woods,  unconsciously  leaving  the  deadlii  shajt 
(in  the  wound.)  Liquit  is  closely  appended  by  que  to  the  foregoing  propo- 
Bition,  and  equivalent  to  a  present  participle.  Conjecta  sagitta ;  ablat. 
absol. — — TS.  Sidonias  opes ;  Fhoeuician  wealth;  the  splendor  of  hcr  new 

city. Paratam  ;  alreadi/  prepared ;  prepared  to  receive  Aeneas,  and  thus 

to  save  him  from  longer  trial  and  delay.     Comp.  i.  557. Ti*  Labente 

die ;  ablat.  abs. ;  ivhert  the  day  is  declining. 79.  Ab  orc  ;  on  the  lips. 

80.  Cbi  digressi  (sunt) ;  ivhcn  they  (the  guests)  havc  retircd. Obscnra ; 

Jading. 81.  Cadcutia  sidora.    See  on  ii.  9. 82.  Stratis  rclictis ;  on 

the  couch  lejt  by  Aencas. 84.  Ascauinm  ;  he  too  is  absent ;  but,  in  fancy, 

she  caresses  him. 85.  Si,  interrogative  and  elliptical ;  (seeking)  whethcr. 

See  on  i.  181.     llcr  new  passion  withdraws  her  mind  wholly  from  all  public 

duties. 87.  Propugnacnla  ;  Joriijications. Bcllo  ;  dative  h^Iqy  parant. 

88j  89.  Miuae  mnrornm  ingcutes  ;  iov  muri  ingentes  ct  minantes ;  vast 

and  imposing  walls. 89.  Machina  ;  towers  were  erected  on  the  walls  for 

the  more  elfcctual  working  of  the  warlike  engines  or  tormenia,  the  ancient 
artillery  for  hurling  darts  and  stones.  Ilere  machina  signifies  the  towcr 
itsclf,  on  which  the  machine  is  elevated. 


,<r;^ 


H 


90-128.  Juno  sceks  to  entrap  Vcnus,  and  to  pre- 
vent  the  founding  of  tlie  destincd  Trojan  eiupire  iu 
Italy,  by  proposing  to  briug  about  a  marriago  bc- 
tweon  Aencas  and  Dido,  to  wbich  Vcnus,  knowiug 
tliat  tho  fatcs  cannot  tlius  bo  frustratcd,  ni-tfully 
conscnts. 

90.  Qnam  refcrs  to  Dido. 91.  Famam  ; 

"^p    hcr  regard  for  reputation. 92.  Aggroditnr  ; 

addrcsscs. 93.    Vcro  ;    indeed ;    sarcastic. 

91.  IVnmcn;  subject  of  est  understood; 

your   diviniiy  is  grcat   and  Jamous.      Some 

read  nomen  in  the  accusative. 96.  Adeo 

adds  forcc  to  me  ;  nor  me  ai  least ;  even  if  it 

cscapcs  othcrs. Vcritam  ;  having  Jearcd; 

tliat  is,  bccause  you  have  feared. 98.  Qno 

nnnc    certamino    tanto  ?      supply     tenditis ; 
Cupld  toituring  rByche.        whiiher  arc  you  going  no\o  in  the  co7iiest  so 


BOOK    FOURTH.  441 

great  (as  it  luis  already  been);  what  further  object  have  you  to  accomplish? 

you  have  ah'cady  entrapped  Dido. 99.  Quin ;  wIit/  not.     Gr.  §  262,  R. 

10,  n.  9;  Z.  §  542. 102.  Commnacia;  incommon. 102,  103.  Paribus 

ttnspicii^ ;  under  our  joint  auspices ;  let  them  regard  us  cqually  as  their 

tutclar  deitics. 104.  Dotales;  an  a  dowrij ;  this  is,  ordinarily,  a  gift  pre- 

sented  by  the  bride,  or  by  hcr  father,  to  thc  bridegroom.     Here  Juno  takcs 

the  place  of  the  parent. Pcrmitterc ;  to  snbmit,  or  yield  vp. Taac 

dextrae ;  to  thy  powcr,  or  posscssion ;  as  Yenus  would  thus  become  the 

mother-in-law  of  Dido. 105.  Olli  limits  diccre,  understood  after  cst  in- 

gressa,  began.     Venus  mects  Juno  with  still  deeper  dissimulation. 106. 

Qno  ;  in  order  that. Beguiim  Italiae  ;  the  (destined)  kincfdom  of  Italy ; 

or  Komau  empire  that  the  fates  liad  decreed.  Juno  intends,  if  possible,  to 
dotain  Aencas  and  the  Trojans  in  Carthage,  so  that  Libya  instead  of  Italy 
may  be  the  scat  of  the  great  dominion ;  thus  the  destined  empire  would  be 

turncd  aside  (as  it  were)  to  Africa. 109.  Si.    The  apodosis  is  understood ; 

your  plan  plcases  me,  if  only,  &c. Factam  ;  the  act ;  namely,  of  uniting 

thc  two  races. 110.  Fatis;  ablative  cause  oi  incerta  fcror,  uQt  of  incerta 

alone.     /  am  rendered  uncertain,  ani  held  in  doubt. Si ;  interrogative ; 

whether. 11-4.  Scqnar;  I  will  follow  yonr  loishes ;  will  sccond  you. 

Exccpit;  replied;  litcrally,  took  (the  discourse) /rowi  (her) ;  or,  took  it  up 

where  she  ceased. 115.  Iste,  in  the  proper  significatiou,  referring  to  the 

secoud  person;  that  labor  yoz«  speak  of. IIT.  Venatam  ;  supine  denot- 

ing  the  purpose  of  ire.     Gr.  §  276,  ii. ;    Z.  §  668,  2d  paragraph. 119. 

Titan.     Sol  is  so  called  as  son  of  the  Titan,  Hyperion.      Wheii  the  morroiv^s 

siin  shall  Jmve  lifted  his  first  risings. iletexcrit ;  shall  havc  uncovered ; 

rc,  negative,  as  in  i.  358,  and  often. 120.  Sigrautem  ;  black  tcith  mingled 

hail. 121.  Dam  trepidant  alac  ;  tvhile  the  mountcd  huntsmen  are  liurrying 

around;  that  is,  scattered  everywhere  in  the  excitement  of  the  chase. 
Alae,  applied  properly  to  the  cavah-y  of  a  legion  ;  herc  to  horsemen  attend- 

ing  upon  Dido  and  Aeneas. NoctC  ;  darkness. 124.  Spelancam.     See 

on  i.  2, 125.  Adcro  ;  /  will  be  present ;  as  Jimo  pronuba,  slie  presides 

ovcr  nuptials. 126.  Connuljio,  etc. ;  i.  73. 128.  Dolis  risit  repcrtis ; 

Venus  having  detected  (seeiug  through)  the  stratagem,  laugJied.  Dolis,  abla- 
tivc  absol.  with  repertis.  Comp.  i.  122.  Venus  knew  from  her  late  inter- 
view  with  Jupiter,  (i.  227  sq.,)  that  the  fates  would  prevent  the  fulfilment 
of  Juno's  design  of  kccping  the  Trojans  away  from  Italy.  Sonie  take 
rcpcrtis  in  thc  sense  of  invcntcd;  i.  e.  by  Juno. 

129-172.  Aeneas  and  Dido,  witli  their  attendante,  £:o  to  Lunt  among  the  mountains. 
Through  the  contrivance  of  Juiio,  they  ai-c  ovcvtalien  by  astorm,  and  both  are  brought 
togcther  iiito  the  eanie  cavc. 

130.  Jubare ;  thesunbeam;  for  the  sun  itself. 13!.  Rctia  rara  ;  the 

distended  toils  ;  hunting  nets,  with  wide  expanded  nieshcs. Flagac  ;  nets 

of  stronger  material,  for  largcr  gamc,  such  as  wild  boars,  bears,  &c. 

Lato  fcrro ;  see  on  i.  1C4;  ablat.  of  qualitv. 132.  Massyli;  a  people  of 

19* 


442 


NOTES    ON    1HE    AENEID. 


eastern  Nuniidia,  put  here  for  Africans  in  gcueral. Rnaut  is  joiaed  bj 

zcugnia  with  all  the  nominatives ;  effcruntur  would  havc  becn  more  proper 

with  retia,  plagae,  and  venahula. Odora  canam  Tis  ;  for  canes  acri  odora- 

tu;  th€  keen-scented  hounds. 133.  Conctantem  ;   lingering.- 135.  So» 

nlpcs;  the  stamping  horse ;  i.  e.  the  one  prepared  for  the  quecn. 137. 

Sidoniam.     The  first  syllable  is  common. Chlamydem ;  a  mantle  thrown 

over  the  persou,  either  for  use  or  ornament.  See  the  figure  of  Apollo  be- 
low.  For  the  accusative  after  circumdata,  see  Gr.  §  234,  R.  1,  (a) ;  Z.  §  458. 
The  participle  perfect  of  the  passive  is  sometimes  used  of  a  person  who  has 
done  something  to  hhnself,  and  is  thus  foUowed  by  the  accusativc,  hke  the 
Greek  participle  perfect  of  the  passive  and  middle.     Madvig,  §  237,  obs. 

b. Limbo ;    an 

ablat.  of  descrip- 
tion,  limiting  chla.- 

mydem. 138» 

In  anrnm.  Hcr 
hair  is  either  bound 
by  a  band  of  gold, 
or  by  a  not  of  gold- 
en  threads.  Others 
say,  fasteued  with 
a  golden  chisp. 

139.  Filinla ;  a 
clasp,  fastening  the 
girdle  round  ber 
waist.  Comp.  i. 
492 ;  sec  also  note 
on  i.  448,  449. • 

140.  Aeneas  is 
compared  to  Apol- 
lo,  as  in  i.  498-504, 
Dido  to  Diana. 
Apollo  in  the  sum- 
mer  visited  Patarn, 
on  the  banks  of  thc 
Xanthus  in  Lvcia, 
and  in  winter  his 
native  Delos.  To 
this  island  resort- 
cd,  at  this  season, 

ApoUo  (Bclvcdert).  ),is  worshippers 
from  fur  and  ncar;  among  theni  tlic  Dri/opcs  from  Parnassus,  and  the  Sar- 
Diatian,  or  Kussian  Agatliyrsi,  who  practised  tatooing  their  skins.  Ilcnce 
picti. 146.    Fromnnt;    sing  (wliile  moving),  rownd  thc  altara. 148. 


BOOK   FOURTH.  443 

Fronde ;   namcly,  tlie  laurcl,  which  was  sacred  to  him. Fingens ;  hia 

Etatucs  represent  the  hair  ncatly  arranged. Anro  J  in  a  golden  diadem. 

Tela  sonant  hnmcris  ;  the  arrows  iu  tlie  quiver  upon  his  shoulders  rattle 

as  he  moves  along. 149.  Uand  segnior  ;  not  less  jlorious. 151.  Vcn- 

tam(est);  theycame;  literally,  i<  was  come.     For  the  tense  after  ^os^^wam, 

eee  on  i.  216. 152.  Dejectae  J  comp.  x.  101 ;  driven  down  from  the  sum- 

mit  ofthe  rock ;  so  dejectae  is  understood  by  Wunderlich,  Thiel,  and  Peerl- 

kanip.     Others  translate  it,  having  cast  themselves  down. 153.  Decnr- 

rere;   perfect  tense. 154.    Transmittnnt  cnrsn,  for  transcurrunt ;    the 

reflexive  se  is  sometimes  omitted  after  transmittere,  as  often  after  trajicere. 

Cervi.    See  on  i,  186. 154,155.  Agmina  giomerant;  gather  their 

dustij  herds ;  i.  e.  in  leaving  the  mountains  they  come  together  in  herds; 
thus  in  prose  the  form  ■would  be  jnontibtis  relictis  as  a  subordinate  proposi- 

tion  instead  of  the  co-ordinate  montes  relinquunt. 158.  Votis  ;  join  with 

optat  as  an  ablativc  of  manner. 162.  Passim  ;  in  disorder  ;  literally,  here 

and  thcrc. 164.  Amnes  ;  torrents  ;  instantly  formed  by  the  rain. 166. 

Prima  ;  iov  primum  ;  firsl,  or  i7i  the  first  place.     Tellus  and  Juno  both  fos- 

ter  marriage  rites. 167,  168.  Conscias  connn1)iis  ;  witness  to  the  miptials  ; 

referring  both  to  the  lightning  and  the  air.     For  the  dative  after  conscius, 

see  Gr.  §  213,  R.  7  ;  Z.  §  437,  n.  2. 168.  UlnlarBnt ;  the  flashing  of  the 

lightning,  and  the  howling  of  nymphs,  are  tokens  of  calamity. 110. 

Specie  famave ;  by  propriety  or  rcport. 

173-195.  Famc,  a  monster  wliose  form  and  character  aro  described,  reports  tlie  alli- 
ance  of  Acneaa  and  Dido  to  larbas,  a  powerful  Gaetulian  ijrince,  ■who  is  a  suitor  fol 
tlie  hand  of  Dido,  and  from  whom  she  had  purchased  the  right  to  settle  in  Afrioa. 

173.     The  following  description  of  Fame  is  in  imitation  of  II.  iv.  442,  443. 

173-175.  Fama — enndo.     Fame,  an  evil,  than  ^vhich  no  other  flourishes 

swifter  in  motion,  (moves  with  greatcr  swiftness,)  and  gains  power  (more 

rapidly)  by  travelling.     In  other  editions  there  is  a  colon  after  ullum. ■ 

176.  Primo;  atfirst;  when  a  rumor  first  springs  up,  it  is  reported  with 

something  of  doubt  and  timidity. 177.  Solo ;    on  the  gronnd. 178. 

Ira  irritata ;  provoked  by  the  vengeance  of  the  gods;  by  the  punishment 
which  the  gods  inflicted  upon  her  childrcn,  the  Titans,  in  hurling  them  down 
to  Ilades.  The  poets  oftcn  confound  thc  giants  with  the  Titans ;  as  here 
Cocus  and  Enceladus;  the  first  of  whom  was  a  Titan,  and  the  other  a  giant. 

179.  Perlubent;  thcy  relate;  perhibcre  is  said  of  traditions. 181. 

Cni  limits  sunt,  (understood  after  oculi,)  and  sonant.  To  whom  there  are  as 
viany  sleepless  eycs  underneath  (the  feathers),  to  whoni  as  many  tong-ues  ana 
us  mctny  mouths  resonnd,  (who)  pricks  up  as  many  ears  as  ihere  are  feathers 

cn  her  body.     For  every  feather  there  is  an  eyc,  a  tongue,  and  an  ear. 

184.  Coeii  mcdio  terracqne,  foV  inter  cochnn  et  terram:  medio  is  a  noun,  or 
agrees  with  loco  understood ;  medius,  for  inter  is  thus  used  also  in  prose ; 

Caes.  B.  G.  i.  34  •  looum,  medium  utriusque. 185.  Stridens  refers  to  the 

'.■usUing  sonnd  of  fc»*r  wings.     So  Horace  says  of  winged  Fortune,  0.  i.  34, 


444 


NOTES   ON    THE    AENEID. 


15;  Hi7ic  aptcem  rapax  Fortuna  cum  stridore  acuto  smtulit.  Scbmidt  referi 
stridcns  to  the  sound  of  llw  voice :  "  Like  an  owl,  whooping  all  night  long." 

1S6.  Lnce ;  by  day. Custos  ;  as  a  guard;  that  she  niay  detcct  every 

thing. Tecti  here,  as  opposed  to  turribus,  palaces,  signifies  tlie  common 

dwelling.     Eunior  busies  herself  in  spying  out  the  afFairs  both  of  the  com- 

mon  people  and  of  the  great. 188.  JVantia;  in  apposition  with  illa;  a 

messenger  adhering  as  much  to  the  false  and  malicious  as  the  trve. 189. 

Tani ;   now;    while  Aeneas  was  at  Carthage. 190.    Gaudens.     Rumor 

specially   delights  in  slanders  concerning  public  characters. 192.    Cnl 

Viro;  to  whom,  as  a  hushand. Dignetur;  subjunctive  in  the  oratio  ohli- 

qua.     Gr.  266,  2  ;  Z.  §  603. 193.  Uicmeni  foverc  ;  a  bold  expressiou  for 

hiemem  inter  voluptates  transigere;  they  wcre  spending  the  uintcr  in pleasure, 

and  mutual  cndearments. Qnam  longa  (sit) ;  as  long  as  (it  is) ;  i.  e.  the 

cntire  winter.     Comp.  viii.  86. 194.  Regnornm ;  the  liingdoms  of  both; 

tliat  of  Dido,  as  well  as  the  future  kingdom  of  Aeneas. 195.  In  ora ;  we 

fihould  have  expected  diffundit  in  aures,  or  spargit  per  ora  ;  the  poet  means 
to  include  both  ideas. 

196-218.  larbas  calls  iipon  Jupiter,  his  reputcd  father,  to  avenge  tlie  insnlt  cast  np- 
on  him  by  Dido  in  rcjectiug  his  oflers  of  marriage,  and  reeciving  Aeneas,  a  mere  fugi- 
tive  from  Asia. 

196.  larban.  larbas,  or  Iliarbas,  a  powerful  king  of  Nuniidia,  pretend- 
ed  to  be  the  son  of  Jupiter  Ammon,  or  Ilammon,  whose  worship  he  intro- 
duced  throughout  his  dominions.     larbas  had  sold  thc  site  of  Carthage  to 

Dido,    and   was   one   of  her   suitors. 198. 

Garamautidc,  for  Lihyca  ;  Lihyan.     Thc  Gara- 
mantes  were  a  people  dwelling  in  the  country 

now  called  Fezzan. 200.  Vigilem  ;  perpetu- 

al ;  always  burning  on  the  aitars. 201.  Ex- 

cabias  ;  watch-fires  ;  in  apposition  with  i^/iem; 
the  firc  was  keeping,  as  it  were,  never-cnding 

vigils  in  the  scrvice  of  the  gods. 202.  Vari- 

is  sertis ;  with  cver-reneivcd  garlands.  Fresh 
garlands  wcre  usual  on  the  occasion  of  every 
sacrifice  and  feslival;  hcnce  it  is  implicd  here 
as  well  as  in  j)i7iguc  that  thc  sacrifices  wcre 
-Solam  and  liiuin&  ;  accusatives  arter  sacra- 

verat. 20j.  Anicns  animi ;  fi:rious.     For  thc  genit.  see  Gr.  §  213,  R.  1, 

(a);  Z.  §  437. 201.  Mcdia  intcr  numina  ;  in  rhe  midst  of  the  images  of 

the  gods ;  "  in  the  divine  prcsence ; "  in  thc  temple.  A  tcmple  consecrated 
to  a  particular  deity,  contaiiied  usually  only  thc  statuc  of  that  deity  ;  a  pati- 
thcon,  on  the  contrary,  contained  the  statues  and  altars  of  all  the  great 

gods,  Jupitcr's  bcing  the  most  conspicuous. 205.  Snpluis  ;  outstrctched. 

206.  Nunc.     Ilitherto  the  worship  of  Jupiter  has  bcen  unknown  in  thia 

country  ;  it  is  I,  larbas,  who  liiivc  lioiioicd  Jupitcr  by  cstabliBhing  it  hcro. 


Jupiter  Annuon. 
very  numerous  and  constant. 


BOOK    rOURTH. 


445 


Maurnsia ;  Moorish  ;  used  here  to  include  the  people  of  larbas. 20Tt 

Epnlata  ;  after  partaking  of  the  festive  hanquct. Lenaenni  honorcm  ;  the 

libation  of  wine. 209.  Ciieci ;  withoutaim;  without  purpose  ;  hlind;  are 

the  lightnings,  after  all,  not  under  thy  direction? 210.  Inania  mRrmnra; 


Phrygian  or  Trojan  youth. 

and  do  thoj  (the  lightnings)  mingle  vain  thunders? — do  they  occasion  thun- 

derg,  which  also  are  not  tokens  of  thy  displeasure.  and  fbr  which.  ther^fore. 


446  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID, 

flonc  nced  stand  iu  fear  of  thec? 212.  Pretlo.     Sce  i.  367. 213.  Lc- 

ges,  for  imperium ;  dominion  over  the  place  ;  so  Heyne ;  but  otliers  under- 
stand  by  leges,  the  conditions  or  terms,  on  which  the  place  should  be  held ; 
and  the  latter  has  the  advantage  of  making  the  scorn  of  larbas  the  inore 
pointed.     She  was  so  humble  that  she  submitted  to  his  terms  iu  making  her 

first  settlcmcnt  on  the  shore.-; 214.  Rcimlit  makes  the  inscparable  re 

long.     Gr.  §  285,  R.  3,  (b). 215.  Paris;  the  terra  is  applied  to  Aencas 

in  contcmpt  of  his  nation,  as  well  as  of  his  prcsent  connection  with  Dido. " 

Iiirbas  would  claim  to  be  another  Menelaus. Scniiviro  *,  the  Romans  in 

the  republican  period  despised  the  dress  of  the  Phrygians  as  efreminatc, 

216.  Maeonla;   more  strictly  a  Lydian  country,  but  distinguished  by 

the  same  habits  of  dress  as  Phrygia,  whose  inhabitants  wore  a  peaked  cap 
with  lappets  passing  round  the  face,  and  meeting  under  the  chin.  See  head 
of  Priani,  p.  395.    In  the  cut  on  the  preceding  page  the  lappets  are  folded  up 

on  the  temples. Meatani ;  thc  Greek  accusative,  (see  i.  228,)  to  be  joined 

with  subnixus.     Some  editions  have  suhnexus,  fastcned  U7ider,  instead  of  swp- 

ported. Madentein  ;  anointing  the  hair  with  perfumed  oils  was  also  a  cus- 

tom  of  Asiatic  origin. 217.  Potitnr;  hcre  of  the  third  conjugation,  as  iii. 

56 ;  Gr.  §  177 ;  Z.  §  210. 218.  Qnippe  ; /orsoo!!A. Inanem  ;  empty;  that 

brings  me  no  real  advantage ;  referring  to  his  supposed  relation  to  Jupiter. 

219-278.  Jupitcr  sonds  down  Mercury  to  reproach  Aeneas  for  his  forgetfulncsB  of 
his  destinj'  .lud  duty,  in  lingeriiig  so  long  in  Carthage,  and  to  require  him  to  prcpare 
immediately  for  his  departure. 

219.  Aras  tenenteni ;  to  bc  taken  literally ;  in  earnest  supplication  the 
worshippers  laid  hold  upon  the  altars  as  if  thus  to  come  into  close  contact 

with  tbe  god  of  the  altar. 220.  Moenia  ;  Carthage. 223.  Vade  age  ; 

hasten.     Comp.  iii.  4G2. Pennis;  ^vith  your  ivings  ;  rcferring  to  those  on 

the  sandals  aud  on  the  cap  of  Mcrcury. 225.  E.\speftat ;  is  ddatjing. 

223.  Ideo  ;/or  such  a  pui-pose;  namely,  as  that  of  dwclling  at  Car- 

thage.  Bis.     Acneas  was  rescucd  by  his  mothcr  from  Dionied,  sce  on  i. 

97  sq.,  and  II.  vi.  311,  and  again  when  in  danger  of  perishing  in  the  sack  of 

Troy ;  sce  ii.  632,  633. Vindicat ;  the  present  tcnse  iniplies  has  saved, 

and  is  still  protecting. 229,  230.  Qni  regeret ;  such  an  one  as  shoidd 

govern.     Gr.  §  264. 231.  Prodcret ;  shoukl  j^ropagalc.     Supply  et.     For 

the  subjunctivo  imperfect  as  a  futurc,  aftcr  past  tcnscs,  see  Z.  §  496,  5. 

232.    After  acccndit  supply  cwn. 233.  Snper ;  on  account  of. Ipsc, 

in  contrast  with  Ascanius. 234.  Pater;  docs  hc  a  father  envy? 235. 

Spc  docs  not  lose  its  vowel  hcrc. 230.  Ansoniani ;  Italian  ;  his  dcstincd 

Latin  dcsccndants. 237.  Hie  nnntin:j  csto ;  A<  this  bc  the  mcssagc  from 

uie. 239.  Tahiria;   wingcd  sandah. 212.  Airpim  ;   thc  caduccus,   or 

wand,  around  which  two  snakes  were  coilcd,  the  cmblcms  of  peacc. 241. 

Mortc  rcslgnat ;  opcns  the  cges  (of  the  dcccascd)/mrt  dcaih;  he  conveys  the 
dead  to  Iladcs,  and  thus  un.^-oals  tlic  cycs  of  the  dead  in  conducting  tlicm  to 
Jlades.     The  true  intcrprctnlion  must  rcmain  doubtful.     Tiie  onc  to  bc  prc- 


BOOK    FOURTH. 


447 


fcrred  next  to  the  above  is  that  of  Jahn,  followed  by  Ladewig,  which  rcfcrs 
ye  to  the  foregoing  dat  sojniios  adimitque;  thus:  he  closes  and  opens  thc  eycs 

in  (ordinary)  sleep,  (and)  again  he  closes  the  eyes  in  death. 245.  Illa  frc- 

tnSj   depending  on  this ;  sustained  hy  this. 246.  Apiccm  ;   the  smnmit, 

247.  Vcrtice.     See  ou  i.  741.     Ovid  describes  the  changing  of  Atlas  into  a 

inountain.     Met.  iv.   631-662. Dnri ;    miich  enduring.     Conip.   iii.   94. 

248.    Atlantis ;    of  Atlas,  tchose  pine-bearing  head  co7itinually  encom- 

passed  by  dark  clouds,  is  lashed  both  by  uind  and  rain. Cni  may  be 

translated  by  whose,  and  might  have  been  in  the  genitive  limiting  cnptif, 
but,  as  a  dative,  limits  cinctum  ;  the  head  being  surrou7ided  to  who7n.     Piny 

is  a  frequent  appellative  of  mountains. 250.  Tam ;  at  the  same  thne ; 

then  77ioreover. Jlento  ;  tZe  is  omitted. 251.  Praecipitant ;  rushdoum.; 

se  is  omitted,  as  in  ii.   9. 252.  ^iidiii  \  poising  hi^nself. Cjnenins ; 

Mercury  is  so  called  from  his  birth-place,  Mount  Cyllenus,  in  Arcadia.  Mer- 
cury  first  rests  on  Mount  Atlas,  and  then  darts  down  to  the  point  for  which 
his  flight  was  first  directed.     Milton  has  caught  frotn  this  his  description  of 

the  descent  of  Raphael.    Par.  Lost,  v.  266. 253.  Toto  corpore  ;  with  his 

whole  weight ;  allowing  the  weight  of  his  body  to  have  its  full  effect,  without 

any  resistance  from  the  wings. 254.  Avi ;  some  bird,  of  the  kind  that 

feeds  on  fish,  and  hence  is  accustomed  to  dart  down  swiftly  to  the  water, 

when  it  has  caught  sight  of  its  prey. 255.  Ilumilis,  like  subli^nis,  agrces 

with  the  person  or  thing  whose 

situation    is    indicated. 256- 

258.  Hand  aliter — prolcs.  The 
authenticity  of  this  passage  is  de- 
uied  by  Heyne,  Wagner,  and  oth- 
er  commentators,  and  defended 
by  Jahn,  Wunderlich,  and  others 
of  equal  note.  Ladewig  foUows 
the  latter  in  regarding  the  verses 
as  in  keeping  both  with  the  man- 
ner  of  Yirgil  and  nomer.  Corap. 
above,  149,  150  ;  Odyss.  v.  51-54. 
Instead   of    ad    governing    litus 

sonie    cditions   have  ac. 257. 

Secabat  has  the  same  termination 
as  volabat  in  the  foregoin^  verse. 
Such  olfjioioT i\evTa  are  occasion- 
ally  met  with  in  thc  poets.  See 
ili.  656,  657,  v.  8S5,  386,  vi.  844, 

S45. 259.     Tetigit;     for    the     MercuryconveyiDgtliemessage  of  JupUer. 

tense,  see  on  i.  216. Magalia,    See  on  i.  421. 260.  Tecta  novantem  ; 

for  nova  tecta  aedifica7ite7n. 262.  Tyrio  ardobat  mnricc  ;  was  resplendon 

(glowed)  ivith  Tyrian  purph.     Murex  was  a  shell-fish  found  on  the  coast  of 


448  NOTES    ON    THE   AENEID. 

Phoenieia,  Liicoiiia,  Tbcssaly,  Tarentuni,  and  elsewberc,  froni  wbicb  the 

purple  dye  was  obtained. 2G4.  Discrcvcrat;  sbe  bad  inserted  between 

tbe  long  tbreads  of  tbe  cloth  (telas)  cross  threads  of  gold ;  the  cloak  was 
woven  thcrefore  by  Dido  herself,  in  accordance  with  primitive  customs. 

• 265.  Coutinno  ;  at  once. lavadit ;  assails  him ;  the  term  is  chosen 

to  express  the  angry  tenor  of  the  message.     Carthaginis  is  emphatic- 

268.  Tibi,  for  ad  te. 269.  Torquct ;  causes  to  revolve.     Wunderhch  tbinka 

it  is  to  be  taken  literally  with  reference  to  the  turning  of  the  earth  on  its 
a.xis ;  for  Virgil  knew,  says  he,  that  which  Cicero  expresses  in  Quaest. 
Academ.  ii.  S9 :  terra  circum  axem  se  summa  celeritate  convertit  et  torquet. 

Comp.  ix.  93. 2T0.  Mandata;  instructions. 271.  Tcris  otia ;  do  you 

idly  squander  time. luli.     See  on  i.  267. 276.  Dcbcatnr.     Thcy  are 

c?Me  or  destined  to  him  by  fate. 277.  Mortales  visns  ;  human  vision  ;  re- 

ferring  only  to  Aeneas  here. Mcdio  sermone  ;  in  the  midst  of  his  words  ; 

when  he  had  scarcely  ceased  to  speak,  and  without  waiting  for  an  answer. 

279-295.  Aeueas  calls  hia  captains  together  in  secret,  and  orders  them  quietly  to  get 
everj'  thing  in  readiness  for  the  voyage. 

279.  Amens  ;    amazed. ^283.   Agat ;   the  subjunctive,  implying  much 

doubt ;  what  can  he  do  ^ Ambire  ;  approach  ;  hterally,  to  go  round,  as  if 

in  dangcr  of  a  hostile  reception  ;  like  oue  attempting  to  approach  a  furious 

animal. 286.  In  partes  rapit  TJirias ;  hurries  (his  tboughts)  in  differcnt 

directions ;  thinks  rapidly  of  various  expedients.     Comp.  viii.  19,  20. 

288.  Mucsthca;  ^q,c.  ii-om  Mnatlicus.     Gr.  §  86. Yocat.     His  plan  is  ex- 

plaincd  by  what  he  does,  instead  of  being  statcd;  this  would  havc  rcquired 

vocare. 289-291.  Aptcnt,  cogant,  parent,  and  dissimnlent,  depend  on  im- 

perat  or  hortatur  understood. 290.  Ecbns  nofrandis ;  for  entering  on  new 

adventures,   or  for  renewing  their  advcnfures. 291.  Qnando ;  since. 

292.  Nesciat,  speret,  are  in  a  dependent  clause  after  the  infinitive,  in  the 
oratio  ohliqua;   hence  in  the  subjunctive.     Gr.  §  266,  2 ;   Z.  §  545,  (a). 

Speret  hcre  is  apprehend. Rnmpi  is  chosen  with^nicety,  because  the  mat- 

ter  is  alrcady  in  progress ;  not  will  he,  but  is  heing  hroken. 293.  Teuta- 

tai'nm  (e.sse);  the  construction  passes  over  into  the  infinitive,  depending  on 

diccns  or  putans. Aditas  ;  ihe  approaches ;  the  ways  of  addressing  her  so 

as  to  give  the  Icast  offencc.     Supply  sint  after  tempora,  and  sit  after  modus. 

294.  Rcbns  is  in  the  dative  aftcr  dexter ;  adajytcd  to  circumstances. 

Ocins ;  supply  dlcio ;  quicker  ihan  said.     Co^mp.  i.  1-12. Omncs.     The 

Trojan  chiefs. 

290-449.  Dido  beconics  awaro  of  thc  sc;-rot  preparation  of  tho  Trojans^;  and,  bittcrly 
reproachiug  Acneafl,  etill  bcgs  him,  with  entrcaticB,  aiid  by  repentcd  messagei;,  cou 
veyed  by  Anna,  to  change  his  purposo,  or,  at  least,  to  postpono  his  doparture. 

297.  Excepit;  she  first  dctected  the  coniing  movemcnts ;  she  caught  thc 
indications  of  sometbing  new  projected  by  thc  Trojans.  She  saw  soinclbing 
•inusuallj  earnest  in  the  looks  and  movcments  of  the  Trojans,  a  dispoBition 


BOOK    FOURTH.  449 

to  lalk  apart,  perhaps,  and  to  absent  themselves  from  the  palace ;  especially 
Aeneas  himself  would  be  more  reserved.  Lovers  are  always  apprehensive; 
res  est  soUiciti  plena  timoris  atnor,  Ov.  Heroid.  1,  12;  hence  she  was  con- 
stantly  fearing  some  interruption  to  her  present  enjoyment,  omnia  tuta 

timens,  fearing  all  things  (evcn  while)  secure. 298.  Eadcm ;  the  same 

rumor,  which  had  already  roused  larbas. Fnrentl  is  prolepfic.     The  re- 

port  rendered  her  furious. 300.  Inops  animi ;  for  amens  animi.     Gr. 

§  213,  R.  1 ;  Z.  §  437. 301,  302.  Baechatnr  qnalis  Thyias;  raves  like  a 

Bacchanal.     The  first  foot  of  the  verse  is  composed  of  Thyias,  taken  aS  a 

dissyllable,  and  the  first  sj-llable  oiuhi. 301.  Commotis  sacris.     Thc  ves- 

sels  and  symbols  being  brought  forth  from  the  temple. 302.  Andito  Bac- 

cllO  !  when  Bacchus  is  heard;  that  is,  when  the  cry,  Jo !  Bacche,  is  heard, 

announcing   the    Bacchanalian    rites. 303.    IVoctnrnns;    by  night. 

Citliaf^ron ;  a  mountain  in  Boeotia,  on  which  the  rites  of  Bacchus  were  cele- 

brated. 305.  Sperasti.     Not  only  has  he  resolved  to  leave  her,  which 

ehe  regards  as  an  outrage,  but  to  couceal  his  departure. 307.  Data  dex- 

tera.     The  right  hand  given  to  Aeneas  and  his  friends,  in  token  of  protec- 

tion  when  they  were  cast  away  on  her  shores. 308.  Moritnra ;  destined 

to  die.     He  must  know  that  neither  her  honor  nor  her  disappointed  love 

will  suffer  her  to  live  if  he  departs. 309.  Moliris,  for  paras.     Comp.  iii. 

6. 310.   Aqnilonibns,  for  winds  in  general. 311-313.  Si — aeqnor; 

even  if  it  were  not  a  foreign  and  unknown  country  that  you  were  going  to, 
even  if  your  native  Troy  were  still  in  existence,  would  you,  at  this  inclement 

Beason,  when  the  sea  is  rough  and  dangerous,  set  out  for  Troy  ? 314. 

Mene  1  is  it  I,  then,  whom  you  Jlee  ? Per  ;    for  the  separation  of  this 

preposition  from  its  case  in  adjuratious,  see  Gr.  §  279,  10,  e;  Z.  §  794. 

Dextram  ;  the  right  hand  of  hospitality.     Comp.  307. Connnbia  ;  com- 

pare  the  quantity  with  that  of  conjiuUis  in  168. Inceptos;  the  formal 

marriage  had  not  yet  taken  place,  but  Dido  understands  that  a  private  be- 

trothal,  or  the  beginning  of  the  nuptials,  has  been  made. 317.  Fuit  ant; 

for  aut  fuit. 318.  Domns  labentis;  my  house,  or  family,  ruined  in  its 

prospects,  if  you  now  desert  me. 320.  IVomadnm ;  for  Isfumidarum. 

321.  Infensi  Tyrii ;  nothing  was  more  natural  than  that  her  own  Carthagin- 
ian  or  Tyrian  nobles  should  be  jealous  of  Aeneas  and  the  new  comers,  and 
especially  when  they  saw  that  Aeneas  was  about  to  be  made  their  ruler. 

322.  Sidera  adibam;  /  approached  the  stars;  I  was  highly  renowned. 

Comp.  iii.  462.     Prove  the  case  of  sola  by  scanning  the  verse. 323. 

Moribnndam.     Comp.  above,  308. 321.  Hoc  ^omen ;  since  I  am  permit- 

ted  now  to  call  thee  only  stranger,  instead  of  husband. 325.  Qaid  moror ; 

i.  e.  to  die. 326.  Destrnat.    Gr.  263,  4;   Z.  §  575. Gaetnlns ;  for 

African  or  Libyan. 327.  Snscepta  fnisset ;   among  the  Greeks  and  Eo- 

mans  it  was  the  cnstom  for  the  father  of  the  new-born  infant  to  lift  it  up 
{suscipere  or  tollere)  in  his  arms,  in  token  of  his  intention  to  protect  and 
rear  it.     Hence  suscipi  and  tolli  sometimes  are  equivalent  to  nasci.     Trans- 


450  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

latc  here:  had  been  born  to  me. 329.  Tamen;  but,  onlij ;.  thougli  not  th* 

real  Aeneas,  yet  Aeneas  iu  featurc ;  the  concessive  clausc  with  qitanquam 

before  tanien,  is  soraetitues  suppressed,  as  here. 330.  Capta;  captured 

either  by   larbas,   or  some   other  cnemy. 332.    Obnixns ;    strwjgling 

(against  his  cmotions);  thc  perfcct  participle  for  the  present.    Comp.  i.  155. 

Cnrani.     The  grief  which  her  words  and  his  circumstances  awakened. 

333.  Plnrima ;   translate  in  the  antecedent  clause,  as  i.  419;   I  uill 

never  deni/,  0  queen,  that  you  have  done  very  many  favors  to  me,  (literally, 

deserved  of  me,)  which  you  can  enumerate  in  speaMng. 335.  EUssae  ;  Di- 

do's  original  name. 337.  Pro  re  ;  in  defence  of  my  act. 339.  Praeten- 

di ;  I  have  never  carried  before  thee  (caused  to  be  carried  before  thee  in 

bridal  proccssion)  the  torches  of  a  husband;  marriage  torches. Ant,  for 

ncc. Foedera;  marriage  contracts. 340,  341.  Mcis  aaspiiiis  ;  under 

my  own  direction;  at  niy  option. 341.  Coniponere  curas ;   to  close  my 

toils;  referring  to  his  wanderings. 342,  343.  Dnlces  reliquias ;  the  dear 

remnant  of  my  cou7itrymen.     Comp.  i.  30. 343.  Colcrem  ;  /  shoidd  cfi^r- 

ish ;  should  be  now  cherishing  in  my  own  natfve  land. 344.  Posuissem; 

I should  have  built  again  for  the  conquered,  the  citadcl  of  Troy,  rcstored  by 

my  hand. 345.  Grynens;    an  appellation  of  Apollo,  from  Grynium,  a 

town  in  Aeohs,  where  he  had  a  grove  and  temple. 346.  Lyciae  SOrtes, 

also  refers  to  the  oraclcs  of  Apollo,  which  are  called  Lyeiun,  bccause  hc  had 

a  famous  oracle  at  Patara  in  Lycia.     See  on  1-40. Ilic  amor  ;  tltis  is  my 

love ;  thi.s  destined  Italy  is  the  land  which  I  must  love  as  my  own. 349, 

350.  Qnae  iuvidia  est  (tibi)  ?   What  envy  have  you  at  the  Trojans  setfling,  &c.  ? 

Et  nos  ;  it  is  rightfor  us  also  (as  wcll  as  you.) 353.  Turbida  imago ;  the 

countenance  of  his  father,  seen  in  his  drcams,  seems  displeased,  and  to  re- 

proach  him  for  dallying  in  Carthage. 354.  CapitJS  cari ;  his  dear  person  ; 

lifc.     Caput  indicates  all  that  is  most  essential  to  life  aud  happiuess. 

.355.  Fatalibns;  dcstincd;  quae  illifaiis  debcninr. 356.  Intcrpres  dirnm; 

ihc  mcsscngcr  of  the  gods ;   Mcreyry. 357.    Testor  ntrumqne  capnt;    / 

swear  by  each  pcrson  ;  i.  c.  both  by  yoii  and  me.     Comp.  Ovid,  Hcr.  3,  107, 
perque  tunm  meumqne  caput.     But  perliaps  the  two  gods,  Jupiter  and  Mcr- 

cury,  arc  mcant. 362.  Avcrsa ;  with  avertcd  look ;    askance.     Conip.  i. 

482. 363.  IIuc  illuc  ;  now  darting  a  glancc  towards  him,  now  away  from 

him  ;  furious,  yet  scarcely  bclieving  that  her  words  have  made  so  little  im- 

pression ;  that  he  can  speak  so  coldly. ^Totnm ;  him  all ;  his  wholc pcrson ; 

from  hcad  to  foot. 361.  Lnmiuibns  tacitis  ;  with  silcnt  looks  ;  speechless 

at  first  with  amazemcnt  and  angcr.     Join  s<c  with  accensa;  being  thtts  cx- 

asperated;  i.  e.  by  thc  conviction  of  his  utter  want  of  fccling. ProAitnr 

Is  the  historical  prcscnt,  not  the  same  usagc  of  the  prcscnt  as  the  two  verbs 
prcccdiiig,  which  dcnole what  has  bccn  going  on,  and  is  still  continuing. 

306.  Cantibns  is  construed  witli  hornns;  rongh  7vith  jaggcd  rocks.     So 

Eays  Wunderlich.     Thc  olhcr  intcrprctation,  e  duris  cautibus  te  gcnuit,  pro- 
iuced  thce  from  its  rugged  cliffs,  seems  morc  natural.     Jloircns  is,  properly, 


BOOK    FOURTH.  45l 

hrisfhng. 367t   Hyrcanac ;   Hyrcania  waa  a  country  on  the  south-east 

coast  of  the  Caspian  Sca. ^Adniornut  ubcra  5  fjave  thee  suck. 368t  Nani 

quid  dissimnlo»  Dido  now  casts  off  all  restraint.  She  had  entertained  some 
hope  ofmoving  hini,  in  the  beUef  that  he  'was  sincere,  and  that  his  love  had 
but  for  a  moment  yielded  to  ambition;  but  she  now  feels  that  she  has  been 
deceived,  and  she  scorns  the  idea  of  appearing  any  longer  as  a  suppliant, 
where  her  passion  is  really  unrequited.  Therefore,  why  should  she  conccal 
her  indignation  ?  Why  should  she  seek  to  win  him  back?  Why  reserve 
herself,  or  restrain  her  feelings,  for  some  greater  outrage — what  greater, 

indeed,  can  she  expect? 369t  Fletu  is  in  the  dative  after  infjemidt.     Ob- 

serve  the  person  of  the  verb.     She  does  not  address  Aoneas  directly,  partly 

from  her  distraction,  and  partly  from  scorn. 3T1.  Quae  qnibns  antcfcram ; 

this  clause  is  understood  in  two  ways:  1.  What  shall  I sai/  lefore  ichat?  to 
what  feeling  shall  I  first  give  utteracce  ?  2.  To  tvhat  outrages  shall  I  prefer 
thcse?  I  look  upon  any  outrage  as  being  more  tolerable  than  this. 
Surely  no  greater  injuries  can  be  inflicted  on  me.  The  latter  iuterpretation 
is  the  best.  Quae  is  a  relative,  referring  to  thc  foregoing  facts ;  quihus  is 
interrogative,  in  the  dative  after  anteferam.  A  relative  and  interrogative, 
or  two  interrogatives,  raay  stand  in  the  same  clause ;  as,  Quae  quibus  pro- 

positis  essent  consequentia.    Cic.  Brut.  41,  152. 373.  Xnsquam  tuia  fidcs. 

She  has  in  mind  the  circumstances  which  she  immediately  mentions,  as 

proving  his  ingratitude.     Comp.  i.  601-610. Litorc ;  ablative  of  situa- 

tion;  Gii  the  shore.     Comp.  iii.  135. 374..  E.\cepi ;  not  accepi,  as  if  he 

had  come  of  his  owu  accord  to  Carthagc,  but  excepi,  because  he  was  taken 
in  as  a  wanderer,  accidentally  thrown  in  her  way. 379.  Scliicct ;  forsooth. 

— Is  labor,  ea  cura.     See  on  ii.  lYl.     The  fortunes  of  Aeneas,  forsooth, 

are  the  occasion  of  labor  and  anxiety  to  the  gods  in  their  tranquillity. 

382.  Pia ;  the  gods  are  pious  inasmuch  as  they  protect  the  pious,  and  pun- 

ish  impiety.     Comp.  ii.  536.- 383.  Hansnrnm ;  that  you  loill  suffer ;  ie 

would  be  expressed  in  prose. Dido ;    accusative  after  vocaturum. 

384.  Atris  iguibus;  with  smolcy  fires ;  either  suggested  by  the  idea  of  the 
furies,  who  pursued  the  guilty  with  whips  and  torches,  or  by  the  anticipa- 
tion  of  her  owu  funeral  pile.  The  former  is  preferable.  The  meaning  of 
the  passage,  then,  is  this:  as  long  as  I  hve  I  shall,  though  absent,  be  present 
to  your  conscience,  like  a  fury ;  and  when  I  am  dead,  my  ghost  shall  haunt 

you  evcrywhcre. 386.  Dabis  poenas  ;  yoii  shall  snffer  p^mishment. 

387.  Manes ;  for  Hades. 388.   Dictis ;   the  ablative  of  manner,  to  be 

joined  with  ahrumj)it. Mcdinm  sernioucm.  See  on  277,  above. Anras, 

ior  lucem. ;  the  liffht  of  day.-. 389.  Aegra  ;  hroken-hcarted. 390.  Molta; 

adverbial;  Gr.  §  192,  ii.  4,  b,  delaying  much. Mctu  ;  through  fear  that 

if  he  says  any  thing  more  in  his  own  defence,  he  will  but  increase  her  anger. 

392.  Thalamo;  dative  for  in  thalamiim..     Comp.   v.   451. Stratis ; 

ablative. 393.  Pius ;   because  he  is  mindful  of  duty  in  spite  of  feel- 

lug. 395.  Nulta ;  as  in  390,     Comp.  i.  465. 397.  Incumbunt ;  applji 


452  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

Ihewselves ;  i.  e.  to  the  work  of  rcfitting  their  vessels. 39T,  398.  Lltore 

dcdncnnt ;  draw  down  the  ships  from  ihe  shore ;  launch.  Comp.  iii.  71. 
Observe  the  slow  niovcment  of  tbe  spondees  in  the  first  part  of  line  398, 

contrasted  with  the  latter  part,  natat  uncta  carina. 399.  Frondcntes. 

In  their  liaste  the  Trojans  bring  boughs  from  the  woods  with  the  leaves  still 

on,  and  tiraber  unhewn,  for  forming  oars,  yards,  benchcs,  &c. Silvis; 

froin  the  looods. 401.  Cernas  \  one  may  sce,  they  may  be  scen.     The  sec- 

ond  person  singular  of  the  imperfect,  instead  of  the  present,  subjunctive,  ia 
the  usual  form  in  prose  for  expressing  the  indefinite  one  mirfht,  one  may, 
&c. ;  see  Z.  §  528,  n.  2 ;  but  the  poet  here  substitutes  the  present  as  a  more 

vivid  cxpression. Tota;  as  toto,  above,  from  every  part  of 402,  403. 

Velat  qnnm  ;  'the  manner  of  introducing  the  comparison  is  lilce  that  of  i. 

148. 404,  405.  It — convectant ;  both  agree  with  agmen.     See  on  iii.  676  ; 

Gr.  §  209,  R.  11,  2. 406.  Obnixae ;  with  great  effort ;  for  the  construc 

tion,  see  Gr.  §  205,  R.  3,  and  comp.  v.  108. igniina  cognnt ;  keep  the 

ranJcs  together. 407.  Moras;  for  morantcs. 409.  Fcrvcre  ;  glow  ;  ani- 

mated  with  the  stir  of  the  multitude  hastening  their  departure.  Fen'eo, 
stridco,  fulgeo,  are  both  of  the  second  and  third  conjugation.     Show  by 

scanning  to  whicli  conjugation  fervere  here  belongs. 412.  Qnid  cogiSt 

See  note  on  the  similar  sentence,  iii.  56. 413.  Ire  in  I.icrinias;  to  descrnd 

to  tears ;  that  is,  to  tearful  entreatics. 414.  Animos;  her  proud  spirit. 

415.  Frnstra  nioritnra  ;  she  would  die  in  vain  ;  there  would  be  no  just 

occasion  for  lier  conteniplated  suicide,  if  it  should  after  all  be  true  that 

Aeneas  may  be  won  back. 416.  Properari ;  impersonally;  thatitisbe- 

ing  hurried;  that  they  are  hurrying  to  and  fro  all  over  the  shore. 418. 

Imposncre  coronas ;  they  have  hung  wreaths  on  the  sterns  of  the  ships  in 

token  of  joy  at  their  departure. 419,  420.  Si — potero  ;  if  (since)  Imight 

have  CTpectcd  such  grief  I  shall  also  have  provcd  able  to  sustain  it,  my  sister. 
It  is  what  I  ought  to  be  expected  to  eustain,  inasmuch  as  it  was  casy  to 

foresee  that  it  would  come. Tamcn  ;  yet,  though  I  express  this  hope  of 

bcaring  up  under  this  trial. 423.  Sola — noras ;  you  alone  understood  the 

jnost  favorable  ways  and  moments  of  addressing  the  man. 421.  Uostem 

saperbnm ;  my  proud  foe ;  i.  e.  the  one  who  acts  as  if  he  and  I  were  no 
loiigcr  friends,  and,  indeed,  as  if  I  had  been  araong  his  most  deadly  enemies, 
the  Greeks.     Hence  the  following  words :  I  have  not  conspired  with  the 

Greeks,  &c.     Others  take  hostcm  here  in  the  sense  of  stranger. 426. 

Aalide.      Tlie   Greeks   assembled   at   Aulis   before   setting  sail   for   Troy. 

ve ;  nor. 42T.  (^incrcm  revelll ;  to  violate  tbe  ashes  of  thc  .dead 

was  an  act  of  thc  greatcst  impiety. 428.  Dcmittcrc ;  to  admit ;  literally,  to 

let  duwn.  Tho  pctilion  of  Dido  is  contained  in  verses  420,  430;  det ;  expec- 
'et ;  the  foregoii)g  ideas  are  to  be  prescntcd  by  Anna  to  Aencas  in  urging 

thc  roqucst. 429.  Mnnns,  for  gratiam;  favor. 430.  Expcctct,  otc  ; 

let  him  wait  for  a  convenient  departurc,  and  auipicious  viindi. Ycntos 

fercntes.     Comp.  iii.  473. 133.  Tcmpas  inane;  a  trivial  delay ;  a  brief 


BOOK   FOURTH.  453 

eeason  of  time,  which  can  be  of  little  importance  to  him. Spatiam  J  res- 

pite ;  opportunity  for  my  violcnt  emotions  to  subside. 434.  Dolere  ;  to 

endure  grief. 435.  Veaiam  ;  I  ask  this  lastfavor  of  you  (my  sister.) 

436.  Qnam — remittam  ;  which,  when  you  shall  have  given  me,  at  my  death  1 

will  repay  generously. Comalatam,  agreeing  with  quam,  means  heaped 

up,  largely  increased. Morte  is  an  ablative  of  time,  as  below,  502.     The 

above  seems  to  be  the  most  natural  interpretation  of  this  troublesome  and 

much  disputed  passage. 438.  Fertque  refertqae ;  both  bears,  and  hears 

again,  these  various  appea;ls  to  Aeneas.  Repcated  and  earnest  actlon  is 
denoted  by  this  combination  of  a  simple  verb,  and  its  compound  with  »r. 

Comp.  V.  709,  xii.  866. 440.  Placidas.    He  is  disposed  by  his  natural  dis- 

position  to  give  a  liindly  heariug,  but  duty  forbids. 443.  It  stridor  ;  the 

roaring  (of  winds)  resounds. Altae  ;  proleptic ;  the  leaves  overspread  the 

ground,  so  tbat  they  lie  deep. 445,  446.  Ad  aaras  aetheriiis  ;  to  the  upper 

air. 448.  Tanditar;    is  plied,  is  biiffeted. Caras;    anguish. 449. 

Mens ;  purpose.     As  Aeneas  remains  immovable,  Dido  resolves  on  self-de- 

struction. 450.  Tam ;    then;   as  soon  as  Anna  had  conveyed  the  final 

message  of  Aeneas. Fatis  exterrita  ;  rendered  frantic  by  her  terrible  fates, 

or  destiny.  But  Ladewig  refers/a<«s  to  the /a<es  OT.oracles,  which  controlied 
the  action  of  Aeneas.     See  above,  345,  440.     The  unhappy  lot  of  Dido, 

however,   is  more  naturally  meant. 451.  Convexa ;    the  vault. 452, 

453.  Qao  magis  peragat — vidit ;  that  she  may  the  more  readily  accomplish 
her  design,  kc. — she  sees.  The  subjunctive  here  with  quo  denotes  the  desti- 
nation  or  purpose  of  some  higher  power;  as  if  she  were  made  to  see  these 

signs  that  she  might  thus  be  led  on  to  her  fate. 152.  Laecm  ;  life;  the 

light  of  this  upper  world  ;  for  the  pagan  notion  was  that  the  dead  dwelt  in 

the  shades  under  the  earth. 454.  Latices  nigrescere;  the  libations  of 

wine,  poured  out  when  she  was  sacrificing  in  private,  became  dark  like  gore, 

a  sign  which  boded  ill. Obscenam  ;  ill-boding. 456.  Visam  ;  substan- 

tively ;  appearance. 457.  In  tectis ;  within  her  palace  ;  in  the  open  court 

of  the  palace,  there  was  a  funereal  chapel  dedicated  to  the  manes  of  Sychae- 

us. 459.  Velleribus  niv£is  ;  with  snoicy  woollen  bands,  or  fillets.     See  on 

i.  417. 462.  Bnbo  is  feminine  only  in  Virgil.     It  was  a  bird  of  iU  omcn, 

and  whenever  it  appeared  in  Rome,  an  expiatory  sacrifice  was  made,  and  if 
it  were  caught  on  the  premises  of  any  private  family,  it  was  nailed  to  the 
door,  that  its  own  deatb  might  serve  as  a  preventive  sacrifice.to  avert  the 

death  which  its  cry  was  supposed  to  presage  in  the  family. Calminibus  ; 

on  the  palace  roofs. 463.  Longas — voces ;  seemed  to  draw  out  her  long 

notes  in  lame^itation. 464.  Yatam  priorcm  ;  of  the  prophets  before  ;  the 

prophets,  namely,  who  had  been  prcsent  at  the  former  sacrifices,  mentioned 

above,  65.     Heyne  has  substituted  piorum. 46T,  468.  Semper — terra  ; 

an  impressive  forcshadowing  of  death.  Her  mind  is  filled  with  diseased 
fancies ;  she  is  lilvc  Pentheus,  who  was  driven  mad  by  the  Furies  (Eumeni« 
des,  Divae)  because  he  opposed  the  introduction  of  the  Bacchanalian  rites 


454  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

at  Thebes.  His  story  was  the  subjcct  of  tho  play  of  Euripides,  called  the 
Bacchae,  which  seems  to  be  meant  here.  "In  this,  v.  912,  913,  Pentheua 
says  :  I  seem  to  see  two  suns,  and  Thebes,  and  the  seven-gated  citydoublc." 
Ladewig.  Peutheus  and  Orestes,  the  sons  of  Agameinnon,  are  both  repre- 
sented  on  the  stage  as  pursued  by  tlie  Furies.  Aeschylus,  and  the  Koman- 
Pacuvius,  wrote  tragedies  concerning  Orestes.  His  crime  was  the  murder 
of  his  mother,  see  iii.  831,  whose  ghost  therefore  pursues  him,  armed  witli 
torches  and  scorpions.  Ile  flees  for  rcfuge  to  the  tcmple  of  Apollo,  at 
Delphi,  and  the  Furies  follow  to  tlie  door  of  the  sanctuary,  which  tlicy  are 

afraid  to  iavade ;  therefore  they  sit,  guarding  the  entrance. 171.  Sfcnis ; 

on  the  stage.  Ladewig  adopts  tlie  reading  saevls,  agreeing  with  facibus. 
Agitatns;  pursued. 

474-552.  Dido  makos  prcp.aration  for  her  suicide  by  causiiig  a  fuiieral  pyre  to  be 
erectod  iu  the  court  of  tlie  palace,  ostensibly  for  the  purpose  of  biirning  an  image  of 
Aeneas,  and  tbe  arms  and  clothing  left  by  him,  which  coremony,  she  assures  Anna, 
will  magically  work  tho  cure  of  her  lovc  for  Aeneas,  or  else  rcstore  him  to  her  affec- 
tions.  A  sorcercss  from  the  Hesperides  has  given  her  instructions  to  perform  tlie 
ccrcmony,  with  tho  promiBO  of  such  a  rosult ;  and  Dido  causes  Anna  to  beheve  that 
ehe  intends  nothing  more  than  to  go  through  with  these  magic  rites.  In  the  night, 
whcu  by  herself,  she  gives  utterance  to  her  dcep  emotion. 

4Tlt  Concepit  fnrias;  had  become  infectcd  ivith  madness ;  for  the  tenses, 

see  on  i.  216. 475.  Scenm  ;  with  herself  alone ;  without  the  Icnowledge 

of  Anna,  or  any  confidaut. Modnm ;    the  mode  of  accoraplishing  lier 

death. 476.    Exigit ;  jylans ;   thinlcs  out.     The   deceptive  conversation 

with  her  sister,  which  immediately  follows,  is  a  part  of  the  plan. Aggrcs- 

sa  ;  having  addressed. r-477.  Spcm  fronte  sercnat ;  shows  calin  hope  in  her 

countenance.     Comp.  i.  209. 479.  Qnac  rcddat  VCl  solvat ;  such  as  inay 

rcstorc  him  to  me,  or  release  nie  loving  from  him  ;  from  loving  him.  It  was 
a  common  supcrstition  that  incantations  had  power  to  bind  or  release  lovers. 

■ — —481.  AtiaSt     See  on  i.  741. 482.  Torqnet.     Atlas  was  supposed  to 

sustain  the  heaven  while  it  revolved. Aptnm ;  from  the  obsolete  aperc, 

{S.im(TSra.i,)  studded,  spangled. 483.  Massjiae  ;  Libyan. Ilcsperidnm  ; 

tlie  tcmple  of  the  Jlesperides  was  in  the  fabulous  garden  of  the  Ilcsporides, 
sometimcs  assigned  to  the  Canarics,  or  "  islands  of  the  blest."  The  dragon 
guarded  the  goldcn  apples  of  the  Hesperidcs,  and  the  pricstcss,  who  is  now 
in  Carthage,  and  known  to  Dido  through  the  information  of  others,  [mon- 
strata,)  had  ^xercised  such  power  over  the  dragon  as  is  related  of  Medea, 
wlio  sootlied  the  rage  of  the  Colchian  dragou,  by  nieans  of  honey  minglcd 
■niih  di-ugs,  so  tliat  it  bccame  harmless  to  those  whom  she  wished  to  protect. 

4S4.  Epnlasqnc.     Tho  conncctive  — que  licrc  joins  the  attribufe  cms- 

tos,  and  thc  attribute  expressed  by  the  relutivc  clause,  (juae  dabat  cpulas, 

eq. ;  ihe  keepcr  and  ihc  pne  who,  kc. 486.  SpargCUS  ;  conuect  with  dabat. 

■ 4S7.  Carminibas ;  by  hcr  incantations ;  magical  rites  accompanied  by 

forms  of  words  in  verse.  Promiilit,  likc  spcref,  292,  departs  from  the 
regular  prosc  construction,  w!iic!i  rc(]iiiros  the  future  injinitive  aftcr  vcrba 


BOOK    FOURTH.  455 

of  promising,  &c.  See  Arnold's  Lat.  Prose,  1 5.  Ttie  idea  is :  She  says  that 
she  releases,  and  she  promises,  therefore,  that  she  will  release ;  i.  e.  from 

love. 488.  Daras  caras;  tlte  keen  anguish  of  love. 490.  Noctnrnos; 

6?/  night.     Comp.  303. Vidcbis  is  apphed  to  mugire,  because  visible  mo- 

tion  as  well  as  sound  is  conceived  of  in  the  qualiing  of  the  earth. 493. 

Capnt.     Comp.  the  sense  of  the  word  above,  ooT. layitani ;  the  apology 

is  rendered  necessary  by  Roman  rather  than  by  Cartliaginian  manners;  for 
raagic  rites  were  not  reputable  at  Rome.     See  Horace's  epode  on  the  sor- 

ceress  Canidia,  Ep.  5. Accingier ;  for  the  old  infinitive  in  er,  see  Gr, 

§  162,  6  ;  Z.  §  162 ;  for  the  accusative  artes,  see  on  chlamydem,  137  ;  that  I  am 
unwillingly  hegirt  toith  magic  arts  ;  that  I  do  not  willingly  have  recourse  to 

them,  /  call  the  gods  to  witness,  &c. 494.  Secreta ;  unobserved. Tccto 

interiore  ;  in  the  interior  of  the  palaee. ^Snb  anras  ;  into  the  air  ;  on  high. 

Heyne  explains  it  merely  as  siib  divo,  in  the  open  air. 495.  Arma ;  by 

directing  Anna  to  place  the  weapons  as  well  as  the  garments  of  Aeneas  on 
the  pyre,  she  secures  the  means  of  putting  herself  to  death  without  exciting 
the  suspicions  of  her  sister.     That  she  is  told  to  do  all  this  sccretly,  too,  oc- 

casions  no  alarm,  because  magic  rites  are  always  performed  in  secret. 

498.  Jnvat,  monstratqne  sacerdos ;  it  pleases  (me)  that  all  mementos  of  the 
man  shoidd  be  destroyed,  and  the  pricstess  so  directs.     Jubet  is  given  in  some 

editions  for  juvat. 500.  Tamen ;  though  the  deadly  paleness  that  sud- 

denly  overspreads  the  countenance  of  Dido  might  have  excited  suspicion, 
Anna  does  not  believe  her  sister  is  concealing  hcr  death  ivith  these  sacred  rites, 
(is  contriving  her  death  under  the  pretext  of  sacred  rites.)  For  this  use  of 
praetexere,  comp.  above,  172.     The  construction  might  also  be  funeri  sacra 

praetexere,  which,  indeed,  is  more  common. 501,  502.  Menlc  concipit; 

nor  does  she  imagine  sitch  fury,  i.  e.  as  that  of  her  sister. 502.  Ant  contin- 

ues  the  negation.     Comp.  339. ^BIorte ;  an  ablative  of  time,  as  in  436; 

nor  does  she  apprehcnd  more  serious  things  tJian  (what  happened)  at  the  dcath 
<f  Sychaeus  ;  that  is,  funeral  rites  attended  with  the  inconsolable  affliction 

of  Dido. 504.  Pcnetrali  in  sede  ;  in  the  secludcd  cmirt ;  namely,  the  tec- 

tum  intei-ius  mentioned  in  494. 505.  Taedis  atqnc  ilice  secta ;  of  pitchy 

wood,  and  cut  oak ;  some  join  these  ablatives  with  erccia,  as  denotiug  the 
material ;  others  with  ingcnti  as  ablatives  of  the  cause.  The  former  con- 
struction  has  the  best  authority ;  though  the  reading,  huge  with  pines  and 
cut  oaJc,  accords  with  a  frequent  idiom  of  the  language.  Comp.  i.  165,  hor- 
renti  atrum  umbra;  189,  190,  alta  cornibus  arboreis;  648,  signis  auroque 
rigentem;  iii.  464.     In  the  construction  first  given  join  ingenti  directly  to 

jyra;  ahugepyre  being  erected,  &c. 506.  lutcndit — sertis  ;  for  intendit 

loco  seria. 508,  507.  Coronat — fnncrca  ;  icreathes  inth  the  funeral  cy- 

press. '50T.  Snpcr  ;  adverbial ;    above  ;  on  the  couch. 508.  EiSgiem  ; 

an  image  of  wax,  which,  as  it  melted  in  the  fire,  was  supposed  to  betoken 
either  the  softening  and  yielding  of  the  estranged  lover,  or  else  his  wasting 
away  and  death. Fntnri ;  of  what  is  coniing ;  i.  e.  of  her  approaching 


456  NOTES    ON    THE   AENEID. 

death. 509.  Crlnes ;  tbe  Grcek  acc. Sacerdos ;  the  sorcercss  above 

meutioned,  483. 510.  Tor  centain,  for  trecentos  ;  for  a  large  and  indefi- 

nite  number,  She  calls  upon  thrce  hundred  gods.  Others  take  iercentum  aa 
an  adverb,  three  hundred  times,  or  many  times.  Others  again :  she  calls 
thrice  (that  is,  again  and  again)  upon  the  hwidred  ffods.  It  matters  but  little 
which  way  it  is  read;  but  the  first  is  most  likely  to  be  correct.  In  niagic 
rites  it  was  customary  to  invoke  the  names  of  a  great  numbcr  of  gods  iu 
their  order,  according  to  their  supposed  rank,  and  to  name  all  the  titlcs 

pertaiuing  to  cach. Chaos  is  sometimes  apphed  to  the  iuiernal  rcgioiis, 

as  denoting  immeasurable  void  space. 511.  Tergeniinani  Ilccatcn;  triplc- 

formed  Hecate.  Hecate,  who  is  also  meant  by  the  following  words,  tria  ora 
Dianae,  was  of  triple  form^  triceps,  triformis,  see  p.  501,  because  she  was 
Luna  in  heaven,  Diana  on  eJlrth,  and  Hecate  in  Hades.  Her  statue,  with 
three  heads  and  three  bodies,  was  wont  to  be  placed  at  points  where  three 

Btreets  met;  hence  she  was  also  called  Trivia. 512.  Sininhltos ;  counter- 

feit  waters  of  the  Avernian  lake  ;  common  water  being  used  instead  of  ihe 
genuine  water  of  Avernus,  which  was  thought  most  potent  in  magic  rites. 

513.  Mcssae  qnacrnutnr;  are  sought  and  cut. Acnis;  bronze  was 

niore  potent  than  irou. 514.   Lactc;  juice. 515,  516.   Qnacritnr — 

pracrcptns  anior ;  the  hippornanes  tom  from  the  forchead  of  the  colt  just 
foaled,  and  snafched  bcforehand  from  ihe  mother,  is  souqht  for.  Amor  is 
put  here  by  metonomy  for  the  hippomnnes  which  the  dam  was  supposed 

eagerly  to  seize  and  swallow,  uuless  anticipated. 517.  Ipsa  ;  Dido. 

Piis ;  jncre ;  before  niaking  a  sacrifice  the  hands  are  washed  in  running 

watcr. 518.  Pcdcni ;  the  Greek  acc. Vinclis.     Gr.  §  251. In  vcstc 

rccincta ;  the  ungirded  robe  as  well  as  the  naked  foot,  secms  to  have  been 
customary.     This  is  illustrated  in  some  ancieut  works  of  art,  and  in  other 

pocts  quoted  by  Thicl,   Forbigcr,   Ladewig,  and  others. 519.  Tcstatnr 

deos.     She  calls  upon  the  gods  to  witness  and  avenge  her  wrongs. 519, 

520.  Conscia  fati  sidera.     The  stars  witness  all  things  that  transpire  bencath 

them  on  the  earth. 520.  ]Von  acqno  focdcrc  ;  7iot  with  mnt^i-oil  love  ;  with 

unreqnited  love. 521.  Cnrac  ;  dative  of  the  end ;    has  for  a  care ;  has 

under  his  protection. 523.  Qnicrant ;  had  becomc  still ;  i.  o.  icere  hushed, 

or,  at  rest.     In  the  lincs  of  Young,  commencing, 

"  Night,  sable  goddess,  from  her  ebon  throne," 

gloom  is  the  picdomiuant  imprcssion.  In  those  of  Virgil,  it  is  not  the  dark- 
ncss  which  wc  feel,  but  tlie  perfcct  cahn,  and  grateful  rest  of  night.     And 

this  is  contrasted  with  the  rcstlcss  agitation  of  Dido. 52(5.  Qiiacque ; 

bolh  ihosc  (tlie  birds)  which,  &c. ;  both  watcr  fowl  aud  land  birds. 527. 

Soaiao  posKac ;    dlsposed  io  slccp.     Forbiger  takcs  somno  in  the    ablat.  , 

lleyne  iu    the   dative. 529.  At  ncu  ;  but  not  ihus  did  Dido  (soothe  her 

woes.) Auinii.     Sce  on  20;!.     Forbiger  dcfends  the  authcuticity  of  tho 

vcrse  includcd  in  brackcts. 531.  lugcniinant;  rcdoubh  themselve» ;  in- 


BOOK    FOUKTH.  457 

stead  of  being  allayed  by  the  iiigbt.     Comp.  iii.  199,  v.  227. 532.  Acsta. 

Comp.  viii.  19. 533.  Sic  asieo  iusistit  5  so  therefore  slie  persists  ;  thatis,  in 

recurring  to  the  same  ttaiii  of  thought,  and  to  the  same  resolution  of  killiug 

herself. 534.  Ea  qnid  ago  ?  Zo,  what  do  I  accomplish?  i.  e.  if  I  attenipt 

any  course  otlier  than  self-destruction? Irrisa  ;  after  being  set  at  noufiJit; 

naniely,  by  Aeneas. 536.  Sini ;  Gr.  §  26-4,  2;  the  rclative  is  equivalcnt 

to  quanquam  ;  heiice  the  subjunctive,  thou[/h  I  have  so  often  already  scorufd 

theni  as  suitors. 53T.  Igitur  supposes  that  the  answer  710  has  been  givcn 

to  the  foregoing  question. ntinia  jassa;  the  most  debasing  coininands  ; 

putting  myself  under  their  power  as  the  humblest  slave. 538.  Jnvat ; 

supply  eos  ;  because  (forsooth)  it  is  a  pleasure  to.them  fo  have  been  formerly 
relieved  by  my  aid,  and  (because)  gratitude  for  my  former  lcindness  remains 

undiminished  with  them. 539.  Stat,  says  Thicl,  is  integra  manet. 510. 

Fac  TClle  ;  suppose  (me)  to  be  williny ;  i.  e.  to  go  with  the  Trojans. Quis 

sinct ;  wlio  (of  them)  will  suffer  me?- — 542.  Lacmedontcac ;  used  re- 
proachfully,  as  Lccomedontiadae  by  Cclaeno,  iii.  248,  with  reference  to  tlie 
falsehood  of  Laomedon  towards  ApoUo  and  Neptune,  and  afterwards,  to 
Ilercules;  a  character  which  his  descendants  are  supposed  to  have  derivcd 

from  him. 543.  Qaid  tani ;  ivhat  then ;  suppose  thcy  should  allow  me  to 

attend  them  on  their  voyage. OvaBtCS ;  the  Trojan  sailors  would  rejoice 

in  taking  away  the  Carthaginian  queen ;  or  ovantes  may  be  simply  as  laeti 

in  295  and  418  ;  rejoicing  to  start  on  the  voyage. 544.  Stipata ;  attended; 

for  this  use  of  the  perfect  see  comitatus,  i.  312.     The  regular  form  of  ex- 

pression  is  given  in  i.  497,  iv.  136. Inferar;  shall  I  be  carr ied  {ngamst 

ihem) ;  shall  I  pursue  ?  i.  e.  as  an  enemy.     Such  is  the  rendering  of  the 

best  commentators. Bcvclli ;  followed  by  the  ablative  according  to  re- 

mark  on  recludit,  i.   358. 546.  Pelago ;  ablative ;    on  the  sea. 54?. 

Quin  morere  ;  nay,  die ;  the  imperative  addressed  to  herself.  She  accuses, 
in  the  excess  of  her  grief,  her  absent  sister ;  recalling  the  first  conversation 

between  Anna  and  herself  about  Aeneas.     See  9-55,  above. 550.  IVou 

Ikmt  {7nihi)?  might  Inot  have?     In  a  question  which  precludes  all  doubt 

thc  iqterrogative  particle  is  often  omitted. 551.  Tangcre;  to  encoicnter, 

552.  Sychaeo  ;  adjectively.     Comp.  i.  686. 

554-584.  A  youthful  form,  like  that  of  Mercury,  appears  to  Aeneas  in  slecp,  aiid 
■warna  him  instantly  to  depart ;  and  the  Trojans  immediatelj'  make  sail. 

554.  Certns  eondi;  resohed  to  set  sail ;  herc  the  genitive,  below,  5G4, 

the  infinitive  is  used  after  certus.     Gr.  §  275,  R.  1,  (2). 556.  Vnitu  redc- 

natis  eodcm  ;  a  vision,  as  if  of  the  god  (Mercury)  retimiing  in  the  sameform, 
as  when  he  appeared  in  reality  to  Aenoas,  265.  Mercury,  as  the  patron  of 
thc  gymnastic  excrciscs,  was  himself  distinguishcd  for  bcautiful  development 
of  form,  and  fine  proportion.  His  statues  now  preserved,  especially  the 
bronze  statiie  in  Naples,  and  the  Mercury  Belvedere  in  the  Yatican,  have 
bccn  pronounced  the  most  perfcct  in  the  world,  in   respect  to  anatomica) 

20 


^i^S  NOTES    OX    TIIE    AENEID. 

beauty. 558.  Oinnia,  Yurein,  coloreui,  crincs,  niembra;  the  Greek  acc. ; 

— qne  loses  its  final  vowel  hcre.     Gr.  g  307,  3. 5(»0.  IIoc  snl>  casQ ;  at 

tfiis  criais. 561.  Circnni  steut  dcindc  pcricula  ;  wliat  danr/ers  irmnediotcli, 

await  you^  deimk^  as  in  vi.  750,  891,  of  tlie  time  imniediately  coniing. 

5G6.  Jani — Yidebis  5  presently  2/021  will  see  the  sea  agitated  with  her  ships. 
ir  you  linger  until  dawu,  Dido,- iu  her  fury,  will  order  licr  flect  to  attack 

your  sliips,  and  lo  set  them  on  f.re. 568.  Eia,  agc  ;  away  !  away  ! 

Varinm  et  mntabiie  ;  see  Gr.  §  205,  R.  7,  C'2) ;  Z.  g  308 ;  woman  is  ahmys  a 

Jic/cle  and  changeable  creature. 571.  Snbitis,  with  reference  to  the  suddcn 

appearance  and  vanishing  of  the  divine  form,  mcant  here  by  umhris. 

573.  Praccipites  5  swift,  iov,swiftly ;  ^om  viiihvigilate  and  considite  trans' 

t7-is;  awake,  take  your  places  on  fhe  benchcs. 574.  Citi  5  quick ;  used  as 

praecipites,  in  place  of  the  adverb.     Observe  the  greater  vigor  of  thc  ad- 

jectivc  as  compared  with  the  adverb. 575.  Tortos  fnnes*,   the  iwisted 

ropes. Qulsqais  es ;  it  was  only  a  vision  resembling  Mercury. 578, 

579.  Sidera  coelo  dextra  feras;  render  the  stars  in  the  sky  propiHous.    The 

stars  were  suppoj-cd  to  influence  the  wcather. 581.  Habet;   posses.^ies. 

Hapiantqae  rnautqnc  ;  thcy  lay  hold,  and  thcy  rush  to  and  fro;  seizing 

upou  tlie  ropes,  arrangiug  thc  sails  and  rigging,  hastcning  to  thcir  placcs  at 

tlie  oaro. 582.  Descrnerc;  thcy  have  (evcu  now)  hft  the  shores. 583. 

Annixi ;  plying  the  oars. 

584-665.  Dido,  at  duwn,  pcrceiving  from  a  wafch-tower,  that  tho  Tro.jaiis  aro  ah'eady 
on  the  sea,  uttering  a  terrible  and  prophetic  curse  on  them,  rushes  frantic  into  the  in- 
terior  of  thc  palace,  ascends  tho  funeral  pyre,  seizes  the  sword  formorly  giveii  to  her 
as  a  prescnt  by  Aeneas,  and  saying  a  few  words,  partly  In  griof  for  ber  inisfortuiies, 
and  partly  in  pride  at  her  succoss  in  establishing  a  kingdom,  plunges  the  weapon  iiito 
her  body. 

584.  Spargebat.     Thc  imperfect  is  usod  with  reforcncc  to  the  following 
Bentence,  regina — ait,  to  which  it  stands  virtually  relatcd  as  an  advcrbial 

exprcssion  of  time :  was  sprinkling,  when  the  qneen,  &c. 585.  Tlthon!. 

Aurora,  the  goddess  of  the  dawn,  according  tothe  myth,  married  Tithonu?, 

one  of  the  sons  of  Laomedon. 5S6.  Spccaiis  ;  from  ihc  watch-iower ;  the 

samc  as  arce  ex  summa,  410. Aibcsccre ;    to  dawn;    lit.,   whiten.     Gr. 

§  187,  ii.  (2). 587.  Acqnatis  ;  with  stcady  sails ;  with  the  wind  blowing 

stcadily  and  favorably  from  bchiud,  so  lliat  the  yards  lic  across,  perpendicu- 

lar,  or  noarly  so,  to  thc  sides  of  thc  vesscl. 588.  Vacnos;  dcserted. 

Sine  remjgc  ;  without  a  sailor :  ih.\s  ([c^mcs  vacuos ;  forsaken  ;  no  sailor,  iiot 

an  iudividnal,  bcing  lcft. 589.  Pcctus  pcrcnssa  dccornui ;  s)niting  [having 

Hmittcn)  herfair  brcasl.     Comp.  tunsac  pcctora,  i.  481.     For  the  Greek  ac- 

cusative,  sce  on  i.  288. 591.  IlJnserit  rcgnis  ;  skall  hc  have  sct  at  nought 

my  royal  powcr  ?     The  plural  is  mcant  to  convey  thc  notion  of  power  and 
dignity  with  morc  fulness;  the  future  perfcct  is  cquivalcnt  to   "  shall  hc 

Bucccssfully  insult  ?  "   both  insult  and  cscape. Adrcna ;  that  a  strangcr 

aud  advcnturcr  should  do  this,  is  still  morc  intolerable. 592.  Tota  ex 


BOOK    FOURTH.  459 

nrbe^  will  not  all  my  people  join  in  the  pursuit?  Supply  alli,  somc,  before 
expedient ;  corresponding  to  tlie  following  alii,  others.     The  incoherent  ex- 

pression  is  natural  in  the  exciteracnt  of  the  moment. 593.  Kavalibns ; 

from  the  docks. Ite  has  the  more  forcc  from  its  position  at  the  end  of 

the  verse,  where  it  is  unusual  to  place  a  vrovd  of  two  syllables  after  a  long 
pause.     This  irregularity,  and  the  very  roughncss  of  the  verse  thus  pro- 

duced,  are  in  admirable  keeping  with  the  spirit  of  the  whole  sccne. 

534.  €iti.     See  on  the  same  word,  574. Tela ;  the  best  reccnt  editioiis 

give  this  word  rather  than  vela. 595.  Mentcui  matat ;  unseats  my  rcason. 

596.  Fatta  impia ;    the  impious  couduct  of  Aeneas  towards  her,  his 

treachery,  is  understood  liere  by  several  of  the  bcst  commentators.  But 
Heyne  refers  it  to  the  violation  of  duty,  or  the  impiety,  as  Dido  regards  it, 
which  she  was  guilty  of  towards  Sychaeus,  in  yielding  to  the  love  of  Aeneas ; 
see  552 ;  now  thy  impious  conduct  affects  thee !  now  my  unfaithfulness  is 
meeting  its  just  punishment.  ^  This  seems  to  me  the  more  obvious  inter- 

pretation. 597.  Tnnc  decnlt.     Thou  hast  no  power  now  to  destroy  tfte 

Trojans;  they  are  already  safe:  thou  shouldst  have  destroyed  them  at 
first,  instead  of  sharhig  thy  thronc  with  Aeneas.     Then  it  icould  have  been 

Jitting,  but  now  thy  commands  are  madness. Sccptra  dabas.     Comp. 

above,  214. 598.  Quem  ;  the  antecedcnt  is  ejus,  undcrstood  with  dextra 

a,ndjides.     Behold  th,o  right  hand  and  faith  of  him  who,  &c. 599.  Hnmc- 

ris.    See  ii.  708. COO.  Non  potai  abreptam  divellere  ?  translate  the  par- 

ticiple  as  a  fiuite  verb  ;  cotdd  I not  have  scizcd  his  body,  atid  torn  it  in  jAeces? 

Comp.  i.  69. 602.  P.itriis  epnlandnm  poaere  mcnsis;  she  might  have 

murdered  Ascanius,  as  Atreus  did  the  sons  of  Thyestes,  or  as  Procne,  the 
8on  of  Tereus,  and  have  caused  the  body  to  be  placed  on  the  table  as  food 

for  his  father. 603.  Fnerat,  iov  fuisset;  see  Gr.  §  259,  R.  4;  Z.  §  519, 

b;  hut  the  result  of  the  contcst  wouldhave  heen  uncertain. Fnisset  is  con- 

cessive ;  suppose  it  had  heen. 604.  Mctni ;  whom  had  I  to  fear,  ichen  re- 

solved  to  diei Castra;  the  camp ;  where  their  ships  were  drawn  up  on 

land.     Naval  camps  were  defended  by  a  wall  on  the  land  side. 005. 

Foros ;  the  hold,  or  hatches ;  the  interior  of  the  ships. G05,  C08.  luiples- 

sem,  exstinxcm ;  for  the  eontraction,  see  Gr.  §  1G2,  1,  (a),  (c);  Z.  §  160; 

comp.   i.   201. C06.  Cum  generc;   Thiel  understands:    with  the  whole 

race,  all  the  surviving  Trojans;  Ladewig:  with  the  family  or  kindred  of 
Aeneas  only ;  after  destroying  Aeneas  and  Ascanius,  she  would  then  have 
cast  herself  into  the  flames,  to  escape  the  vcngeance  of  the  other  Trojans. 

Snper;  moreover ;  comp.  i.  29;  Ishouldhave  castmyself  moreover  into 

thefames. 60T.  So!,  the  witness  of  all  things  on  the  earth,  is  invoked, 

like  the  stars,  520. Flammis ;  beams. 698.  Intcrprcs ;  Juno,  as  Juno 

Pronuba,  is  the  agent  and  witness  of  her  woes. 609.  IlefatC.     See  on 

611. llnlata;  wliose  name  is  shrieked. 610.  Dirac.    See  473. Di ; 

those  deities  that  pity  and  revenge  such  unhappy  lovers  as  Dido.  Comp. 
520,  521. 611.  Accipite  bace ;  attend  to  thesc  urongs ;    accipere  in  the 


460  NOTES   ON    TIIE    AENEID. 

eense  of  animis  acciperc. ^SIeritam  malis  advertite  unmen ;  literally,  turn 

your  deserved  power  to  my  woes  ;  give  heed  to  my  griefs,  for  I  deserve  your 
pity.  Pcerlkamp  and  othcrs  rcfer  nialis  to  the  Trojans,  as  the  evil  orfalxe 
ones,  who  dcservc  pimishmcnt ;  which,  however,  does  uot  secm  to  be  the 

natural  interpretation  of  the  passagc. 612.  Si,  with  tlie  indicativc  licre, 

is  an  cxpros.sion  of  hcr  conviction  that  so  it  must  be ;  almost  cqiiivalcnt  to 
quoniaiii.  Perhaps  Virgil  has  in  mind  tlie  idea,  not  uncommon  with  tlie 
ancients,  that,  on  the  vcrge  of  death  the  future  becomes  more  clear,  and 
thus  Dido  sees  with  certaiuty  that  wliich  awaits  Aencas.  Ladewig  quotcs 
Cic.  dc  div.  i.  30,  animus  approjmiguante  morte  multo  est  divinior,  and  rcfers 
to  ncctor's  prophecy  of  the  death  of  Achilles,  Hom.  II.  xxi.  338  sq.  Tlie 
prophctic  curse  of  Dido  was  fulfilled  in  the  dangers  and  losses  which  Aeneas 
met  with  in  the  war  with  Turnus,  who,  with  his  brave  Eutulians,  came  near 
destroyiug  the  Trojans.  Aeneas  was  on  this  occasion  obligcd  to  leave  As- 
canius  and  his  followers  iu  the  camp  near  the  Tiber,  and  to  seek  help  frora 
Evander.  He  perished  in  thc  fourth  ycar  after  finishing  the  war  and  mak- 
ing  a  treaty  with  the  Latins,  and  was  finally  deprived  of  burial  (the  heavicst 

curse  of  all)  because  his  body  could  not  be  found. 813.  Capat;  for  the 

pcrson ;  ths  impious  one. Neccsse  est ;  it  is  inevitahle.     Eitlicr  tlie  infni- 

tive  or  suhjunctive  may  follow  this  phrase. 611.  Ilic  terminns  liaerct  \  the 

omission  of  et  bcfore  this  clause  is  allowable,  and  cven  a  beauty,  if  we  con- 
fcider  the  manner  in  which  the  line  would  naturally  be  pronounced.  Lade- 
wig  rcfers  terminus  to  the  ending  of  the  wanderings  of  Aeneas — his  fated 
arrival  in  Italy ;  but  it  is  usually  understood  as  meaning  the  limit  of  tliings — 
the  fixed  order  of  things.  Thus  the  sentiment  would  be :  if  this  order  of 
things  is  fixcd  (by  the  fates),  so  that  my  prayers,  so  that  the  gods  cannot 
affect  it ;  yet  lct  the  gods  fulfil  my  wishes  in  regard  to  the  subsequent  for- 

tunes  of  Aeneas. 618.  Fancra  ;  on  his  return  from  Evander,  he  witnessed 

the  havoc  which  had  becn  made  in  his  army. Snb  leges  patis  iniqnae  ; 

iinder  the  terms  of  an  uncqual  pcace  ;  the  chief  disadvantage  of  thc  Trojans 
in  the  peace  made  with  the  Latins,  was  the  loss  of  thcir  separate  nationality, 

and  thcir  languagc. 619.  Lncc,  for  vita. 620.  Ante  dicm  ;  before  the 

time  usually  allotted  to  the  life  of  man ;  prematurely.  It  is  said  by  sorae 
that  hc  was  drowned  in  the  river  Numicius,  and  that  his  body  was  nevcr 
found.  But  Livy,  1.  1,  c.  2,  says  he  was  buricd  on  the  bank  of  the  Nuniicius. 
— — Mediaqnc  ;  — qne  is  said  by  sorae  to  connect  ante  diem,  (taken  as  an 
udjective  =  «w«?«a'«rus,)  and  inhumatus ;  others  conncct  ca(/a<,  and  a  verb 

\mYi\\(nlin  inhuniatus ;  neque  humetur. 621.  Popnlis;  to  thc  Carthagin- 

iaiis  and  Romans.  There  wcrc  actually  several  trcatics  made  between  the 
two  nations,  the  first  B.  C.  500 ;  but  after  the  Romans  had  cxtended  their 
power  ovcr  Italy,  and  had  comc  into  coUinion  witli  Carthage  in  Sicily,  trea- 
tics  between  thc  two  nations  wcrc  observed  only  as  long  as  they  were  too 

much  exliausted  to  rcnew  hostiiilics. 62.>.  Exoriarc ;    arisc  thou  sonie 

avenger ;  she  sccms  to  sce  and  address  thc  future  avcnger.     The  allusion  13 


BOOK    FOURTH.  461 

to  Haiinibal,  •wliose  intense  hatred  of  the  Roman  nation  was  the  immediate 
cause  of  the  second  Punic  war,  iu  which  he  brought  the  republic  to  the 

verge  of  ruin. ^Ex  ossibns ;  not  descended  from  her,  but  rising  up  to 

vepresent  her,  and  to  re-embody  on  the  earth  again  all  her  hatrod  to  the 

Trojan  race,  as  if  he  had  risen  from  her  very  ashes. 626.  Qni  seqnare  ; 

that  thou  mayest  pursm;  to  pursue. 627.  Snnc  olini;  now  or  kereafter. 

628.  Litora  Utoribus ;  (our)  shores  af/ainst  {thciv)  shores,  ^vaves  agahiRt 

icaves,  (our  seas  against  their  seas.) 629.  Ipsique  uepotesqnc ;  let  them- 

selves  (those  of  the  two  races  now  living)  and  their  desccndants  carry  on  tvar. 
— que  at  the  end  of  the  hypermeter,  verse  629,  is  omitted  in  some  editions. 
Wagner  thinlis  it  indicates  that  thc  passion  of  Dido  exhausts  atid  interrupts 

her  in  the  midst  of  her  words. 631.  Abrumpere  Ineem  ;  to  cnd  her  life  by 

breaking  the  thread  of  thc  fates,  as  said  below,  697,  ante  diem,  before  her 

tiyie. 633.  Patria  ;  in  ker  native  land ;  in  Tyre. Ciuis,  for  sepulcrum. 

634.  Mihi ;  join  with  cara. 635.  Properet ;  the  subjunctive  is  used 

after  dic  when  it  significs  a  command. 636.  Piacala  ;  offerings  of  atone- 

ment ;  meaning  here  the  sacrifices  whicli  were  to  aid  in  setting  her  mind 
free  from  Aeneas,  or  in  restoring  him  to  her;  so  Anna  understands  the 

object. Monstrata ;    directed   by  the  sorceress. 638.    JoTi  Stvgio ; 

Pluto;  Zeu?  «aTax^oVios.—— 639.  Est  animns,  for  es<  ?h27(J  in  animo;  it  is 
my  tcill.  When  the  imiigo  of  Aencas,  and  all  that  pertains  to  him,  (see  508,) 
are  consumed  on  the  funeral  pyre,  the  cnd  promised  above,  487,  488,  she 

pretends,  will  be  secured. 641.  Studio  ;  with  zeal ;  in  many  editions  the 

rcading   is   anili  stiidio. 643.    Maculis.      Peerlkamp  says  that  history 

proves  Virgil  correct  in  this  description.  During  the  French  revoiution  the 
faces  of  those  who  were  about  to  sufier  death  by  the  guillotine  were  ob- 

served  by  the  attendants  to  be  marked  with  red  and  Uvid  spots. 644. 

Genas.     See  on  i.  228. 645.  Irrumpit ;  mshes  into  the  inner  coiirt  of  the 

palace. 647.  In  USUS ;  a  present  not  asked  for  these  uses  ;  implying  that 

iii  some  happy  moment  slie  had  bcgged  of  Aeneas  the  sword  which  he  had 

used  in  the  Trojan  war. 649.  Mente  ;  in  thought ;  in  recalling  the  past. 

651.  Dnm  sinebat;  du?n  relates  to  dulcis ;  dear  while  the  fatcs  and  the 

deity  permittcd. 652.  Accipite ;  when  she  sinks  down  dying  it  will  be 

upon  these  mementos  of  Aeneas  that  she  will  fall. 653.  Vixi ;  /  hare 

lived;  my  life  is  closed. 654.  Magna,  for  cZara ;  illustrious ;  her  shade 

retains  the  glory  which  attaches  to  her  character  as  a  successful  founder  of 

a  state. 656.  Poenas  recepi ;  I  kave  exaeted  puniskment  from;  or,  sim- 

ply,  I  kave  punished. 659.  Os  ;  as  oculos,  i.  228.     She  impresses  her  lips 

upon  the  couch,  just  as  Alcestis  is  represented  as  doing  in  the  "  Alcestis" 

of  Euripides. 660.    Sic;    thus ;    even  by  this  violent   death,  and  even 

tliough  unrevenged.     Sub  timbras  =  sub  terras,  ov  sub  mancs. 661.  Ilau- 

riat,  ior  jwrcipiat ;  let  the  ruthhss  Dardanian  see  from  the  decp  thisjire,  and 
hear  with  kim  the  omens  of  my  deaik;  let  him  perceive  that  my  funeral  pyre 
is  already  lighted,  and  expect  thc  fulfilmcnt  of  my  cursc  upon  him,  as  the 


462 


NOTES   ON    THE   AENEID. 


author  of  uiy  ruin.  Comp.  above,  3S5.  Tlic  poet  hcre  removes  us  from 
the  immediate  sccne  of  the  suicidc,  and  dcscribes  it  indirectly  through  the 
vpectators,  or  attcndants  of  Dido,  who  witness  the  act  from  the  couit  below. 

664.  Coniites ;  hcr  female  attendants;  perhaps,  first  Barce,  the  nurse, 

md  then  others,  suinmoued  by  her  cries. 

665-692.  The  news  flies  through  the  city.,  and  Anna  nishcs,  wild  -witli  jirief,  to  the 
Bide  of  hcr  d ying  sister. 

666.  Bacrhatnr,  etc. ;  the  rurnor  fies  ivildli/  throiirjh  the  horror-sviittev 

citi/. 667.  rcniinco;  the  last  syllable  is  rctained,  as  in  iii.  211. 675. 

Hoc  illnd  fnit ;  was  this,  thc7i,  thc  end  of  that  preparation? Me;  did  you 

eceli  to  deceive  even  me,  your  sister? 676.  Iste  ;  in  its  appropriate  sig- 

nification,  as  relating  to  the  sccond  person  ;  that  pyrc  that  yoti  directed  me 

to  prepare.     Sec  494,  495. 678.  Yocasses ;   0,  that  thou  hadst  called  me 

to  the  samc  end ;  a  pluperfect  subjunctive  expressing  a  wish  is  also  found, 
X.  854.     It  might,  however,  be  translated  here  as  a  condition:  if  yoti  had 

called. 681.  Sic  posita ;  when  thou  wast  lyincj  thus.     Comp.  ii.  644. 

Crndclis;  Anna  thus  calls  herself  in  thc  cxcess  of  grief.  Her  absence 
from  her  sister  at  this   last   crisis,   evcn   though    involuntary,   seeras,   at 

the  moment,  like  a  sin  against  her  sisterly  duty. 682.   Exstinxti,  for 

exstinxisti.    See  on  606. 683.  Date,  vnlnera  lynipliis;  ffive  (yfa.teT)  that  I 

may  wash  her  wounds  with  water ;  lymphis  in  thc  ablat.     Some  omit  thc 

comma,  and  put  lyniphis  in  the  dative. 68i.  Super  is  for  insuper. 

685.  Ore  legam  ;  if  any  last  remaining  breath  still  linger,  let  me  catch  it  in 
my  iips;  tliis  \^as  the  office  of  the  nearest  relative  present  at  the  bedside 

of  the  dying. 686.  Seniianiracni ;  four  syllablcs;  semyanhnem. Stri- 

dit ;    gurgles. 692.    Ingeoinit   rcperta  ;    the   light   heing  perccivcd,   shi 

groaned;  mourning  at  the  last  moment  to  leave  the  world. 


I)ldo's  dcal! 


BOOK   FOURTH. 


463 


«93-705.  Iris  is  Bent  dcwn  fi-om  hcaven  by  Juno,  to  rclcase  the  struggHng  Bonl  fi-oni 
the  body. 

The  dead  are  rcgardcd  as  an  offcring  to  Pluto  and  ProBerpino ;  and  thus  a  lock  o. 
hair  is  cut  frora  tlie  forchcad  of  the  dylng  as  a  sign  of  dedication  to  the  gods  bclow, 
Just  as  hair  is  cut  frora  the  forehead  of  the  victims  slain  in  Bacriflce,  and  cast  upon 
the  altar  fire.  Comp.  vi.  245.  But  as  Dido  is  not  taken  away  in  the  course  of  naturc, 
nor  by  a  death  justly  incurred,  but  dics  through  the  pressurc  of  overwhelming  misfor- 
tune  and  despair,  life  lingers,  reluctant  to  leave  her  ;  thus  Iris  takcs  the  offlce  of  Pro- 
serpine  in  obedience  to  the  command  of  Juno,  whom  she  scrves  as  meBsenger. 

695.  Animam  Dexosqnc  artns  •,  Iris  was  sent  down  to  set  free  tJie  sph-U, 
and  the  memhers  (or  body)>miC(^(witli  the  spirit) ;  or  tliat  she  mightTolcasc 
one  from  the  other.  The  raiubow  is  supposed  to  bc  caused  by  the  desccnt 
of  Iris  from  heaven  to  earth.     Scc  cut,  p.  59'7. 


Site  of  Carthage 


464 


NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 


Helios,  or  Bol. 


BOOK   FIFTH. 


Acneas  iii  Sicilj.  Funcrjil  ganies  to  Anchiscs. 
Burning  of  fonr  of  tlie  sliips.  Dcparture  to  Italy  and 
loss  of  Palinurus. 

1-41.  Aeneas  sees  far  ofT  at  sea  the  light  of  Dido's  funeral  pilc,  aiid  with  Bad  feel- 
ings  divincB  the  cause.  His  fleet  is  soon  overtakcn  by  a  storm,  and  forced  to  stcer  foi 
tlic  coaBt  of  Sicily,  where  he  is  again  kindly  received  by  Acestes. 

It  Interea ;  in  the  mean  time ;  i.  e.  whilc  the  scenes  mentioned  at  thc 

end  of  the  Fourth  Book  were  transpirlng  at  Carthage. 1,  2.  Medinn] 

tenebat  itcr  ;  was  fulhj  on  his  way.  Any  part  of  the  way  on  thc  open  sea, 
after  the  harbor  is  left,  is  medium,  accordlng  to  the  cxplanation  given  of 
the  word  in  i.  505.     The  phrase,  says  Ladewig,  is  equivalcnt  to  ixeaov  rhv 

■irKovv,  not  r\)v  ixiaov  irKuvv. 2«  CeHos  ;  determincd,  or  resolved.     Hc  was 

surc  that  he  was  obcying  the  belicst  of  Jupitcr,  and  lipncc  hc  was  unwavcr- 

ing  in  his  rcsolution  to  pursuc  thc  voyagc. Aqnilonc  j  as  freciuently,  for 

the  wind  in  general.  The  north-west  wind,  or  Aquilo,  was  advcrsc  to  theni. 
and,  if  the  term  bc  takcn  literally,  wonld  scem  to  bc  inconsistent  with  seca- 
bat.  Sonie,  however,  in  opposition  to  Ileyne,  takc  thc  word  here  in  its 
strict  meaning,  on  the  ground  that  the  N.  W.  was  at  tliat  season  the  pre- 
vailing  wind,  (see  iv.  310,)  that  it  is  in  kceping  witli  atros,  as  the  north 
wind  blackcns  the  waves,  and  that  an  advcrsc  wind  would  account  for 
Acncas  remaining  so  long  in  sight  of  Carthage.  Thiel  and  Ladc\\ig  arc 
among  those  who  prefer  the  literal  rcndcring  of  thc  word  horc.     Tliiel  joins 

thc  ablat.   aquilone  with   sccabat,   others   with  atros. 3«  Klissac;  Dido. 

Scc  iv.  335. 4.  Qnae  arrcnderit;  does  tlic  poot  reprcsent  this  as  his  own 

conccption,  or  as  an  idea  passing  in  tho  niind  of  Acncas  and  the  Trojiins? 
Sce  Gr,  §  2GG,  3.     Supply  noli  aftor  dolorcs. 5.  Magno  amore  is  reforred 


BOOK    FIFTH.  465 

by  Ladewig  to  the  love  of  Dido  for  Sycliaeus,  wliom  slic  has  wronged  by 
violatiiig  her  vows  of  perpetual  widowhood.     But  it  is  better  understood  of 

her  aflection  for  Aeneas,  which  he  has  outraged. 6.  Notnm  agrees  with 

tlie  following  intcrrogative  chiuse.  The  passage  is  literally  translafed  thus : 
But  the  hitter  pangs,  great  love  having  bcen  violated,  (whcn  great  love  has 
been  violated,)  being  knoion,  and  what  a  frenzied  woman  can  do  being  known, 
lead  the  minds  of  the  Trojans  through  sad  foreboding ;  freely  translatcd : 
But  the  knowledge  of  the  bitter  pavgs  occasioned  by  violated  love,  and  ofuhat 
a  broken-hearted  woman  iyi  her  frenzy  can  do,  leads  the  thovghts  of  the  Tro- 
jans  to  sad  foreboding.  The  participles  notum  (and  noti  understood)  are 
used  according  to  Gr.  §  2*74,  R.  5 ;  Z.  g  637  ;  Madvig,  §  426 ;  the  knowing, 

the  knowledge,  of  the  pangs,  &c. 7.  Pectora,  for  animos.     The  verscs 

8-12  are  the  same  as  those  already  introduced   iii.  192-195. 13.  Qnia- 

nam;  an  old  word  for  cur. 14.  Deindc ;  join  with  JM^e^;  having  said 

this,  he  then  07'ders.    Comp.  ii.  391. -15.  Colligere  arma  ;  to  reef  ihe  sails  ; 

not  here  "to  furl  the  sails." 16.  Cbliqnat  sinus ;  timis  the  canvas  ob- 

liquely  to  the  wind;  he  turns  it  to  such  a  position  that  it  takes  the  wind  on 

.he  sid8  of  the  ship. lY.  Jnpiter  anctor  ;  Jupitcr  as  guarantee,  or  adviser. 

18.  Spondeat — spcrem;  for  the  present  subjunctive  see  Gr.  §  261,  2; 

L.  §  524 ;  for  the  present  instead  of  the  future  infinitive  after  spcrare,  see 

Gr.  §  2*72,  note  4 ;  Z.  §  005,  and  comp.  iv.  487. Hoc  coelo ;  in  this 

iveather. 19.  Transversa ;  the  neuter  pl.  acc.   used  adverbially;  irans- 

versely  ;  athicart  our  course.     For  this  use  of  the  adjective  see  Gr.  §  192,  ii. 

4,  (b);  Z.  §  267;  comp.  iv.  390,  vi.  467. 21.  Tantnm ;  so  much  as  the 

strength  of  the  winds  requires  if  we  would  overcome  thera :  we  have  not 
power  enough  (nec  tantum  sufficimus)  to  strugglc  against  them,  nor  to  keep 

our  course. 33.  Qooqne  ;  and  ivhither. 23,  24.  Litora  portasqne  ;  the 

latter  terra  raore  clearly  defines  the  former;    not  only  the  shores  about 

Eryx,  but  the  harbors  of  the  Sicani.     Comp.  i.  2,  3. 24.  Frateraa ; 

Eryx,  the  giant  who  formerly  dwelt  in  Sicily,  and  gave  his  narae  to  tlie 
town  and  raountain  of  Eryx,  was  the  son  of  Venus  and  therefore  brother  of 

Aeneas. 2.5.    Si — Astra  ;    if  only  rememberinc   ivcll  I  retrace  (measure 

again)  the  sfars  observed ;  that  is,  observed  on  our  voyage  from  Sicily  to 

Africa. llite  =  ?*ec<e,  is  joined  with  servata,  according  to  Ladewig;  For- 

biger  puts  it  with  remetior ;  but  it  is.more  corrcct  to  join  it  with  memor. 

Comp.  bene  memores,  iv.  539. 27.  Jamdadnm  cerno ;  /  have  for  some 

time  seen.     See  Arnold's  L.  P.  C.  §§  413,  420. 28.  Flecte  viam  vclis ; 

turn  your  course  hy  (means  of )  the  sails. Sit ;  can  then  any  laml  be. 

Gr  260,  R.  5. 28,  30.  rila  tellus;  "a  substantive  comraon  to  two  con- 

aected  propositions  is  sometimes  not  introduccd  until  the  second  clause,  or 
an  adjective  and  a  substantive  are  put  each  in  a  separate  clause."     Madvig 

§  474,  g.     Corap.  iv.  154. 30.  Acestcn.     See  on  i.  195.     Ancbises  was 

buried  in  Sicily  during  the  year  just  passed.     See  iii.  710. 36.  Occurrit; 

histcns   fo   meet   them. 37.    Horrldns — nr^ae;    roughfy    equippcd    wilh 

2D* 


466  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

tpcars,  and  with  the  nhin  of  a  Lihyan  hcar.  Horridus  can  be  properly  sala 
both  of  tho  spears  pointed  and,  as  it  were,  bristling,  two  of  which  were  usu- 
ally  carried  by  a  huntsman,  and  of  the  shaggy  hide  of  the  bear.  The  abla- 
tive  alone  after  horridus,  as  in  iii.  23,  would,  according  to  Thiel,  denote 
some  natural  attribute ;  with  in  something  assumed  and  added,  as  a  niark 

of  distinction,  is  indicated. Libystidis ;  strictly  a  substantive,  is  used 

here  as  an  adjective  for  iiJycae. 38.  Criiniso  contcptnin  finmine:  con- 

ccived  of  the  rii'er  (god)  Crimisus.     This  was  a  river  of  Sicily. 39.  Vetc- 

runi  pareatnm ;  of  their  early  {and  common)  parcntage  ;  the  niothcr  of  Aces- 
tes,  the  father  of  Aeneas,  and  the  ancestors  of  all  the  Trojans,  are  of  the 
sarae  race.     The  mother  of  Acestes  was  called  Egesta,  or  Segcsta. 

42-103.  Arrived  in  Sicily,  and  entertained  by  Acestes,  Aenoas  assembles  the  Tro- 
jans,  and  proclaims  a  sacred  festival  and  g.imes,  in  honor  of  liis  father,  the  anniversary 
of  whose  death  has  iiow  come  round.  Ile  thcn  conducts  them  to  the  tomb  of  AnchiBCs, 
and  there  performs  a  Bolemn  Bacrilice. 

42.  Oricnte  ;  used  substantively ;  at  the  rising  of  the  sun. 43.  Litore 

al)  omni ;  from  the  xvhole  shore  ;  from  all  along  the  shore,  whero  they  were 
ncar,  or  on  board,  their  ships.  Comp.  iv.  397. — ^44.  Tnmnli  ex  flggere ; 
froni  the  summit  of  a  mound ;  a  tribunal,  niade  by  throwing  up  the  soil,  as 
was  custoinary  in  preparing  the  tribunal  from  which  the  Koman  gencral 

addressed  his  soldicrs  in  camp. 45.  Geuns  alto  a  sangnine  dirnm ;  the 

children  of  Dardanus  are  great,  and  a  race  from  the  blood  of  the  gods,  bc- 
cause  Dardauus  was  the  son  of  Jupiter.     For  the  elliptical  use  of  the  prepo- 

sition  a  hcre,  see  on  i.  730. 46.   Exactis;   completed. 47.   Ex  qno ; 

since. Diviniqnc  ;  the  versification  has  forced  the  conjunction  out  of  its 

proper  place  after  ossa.     So  Hor.  Car.  Saec.  22 :  ^d  cantus  rcferatque  ludos. 

48.  Maestas;  funereal. 49.  Kisi  fallor;  the  doubt  arises  from  the 

want  in  ancient  times  of  means  for  determining  the  sidereal  year  with  ex- 

actness. 50.   Ilonoratnm ;   a  day  on  which  honores,  or  sacrifices,  and 

othcr  tokcns  of  religious  homage  are  rendcred  to  the  gods,  eithcr  for  sad 

or  joyful  dispcnsations. 51.  Hnnc  (cZirai)  cgo  agcrem  si ;  even  if  I  wcre 

spcnding  this  day,  &c.     Our  punctuation  of  tliis  passage  is  that  preferrcd  by 

Jahn,  Pcerlkanip,  Forbigcr,  Ladewig,  and  all  tlie  latest  authoritics. 52. 

Deprensns ;  ovcrtakcn;  not  by  the  encmy,  but  by  this  annivcrsary,  or  peri- 

od  of  the  year,  in  so  unfavorable  a  situation. Et  nrbc;  on  the  Argolic 

sca  and  in  the  city  of  Mycenae,  that  is,  in  the  midst  of  our  worst  encmics ; 
or  on  the  Gaetulian  quicksands,  that  is,  in  thc  midst  of  the  greatest  natural 
perils.     Myccnac  is  usually  of  the  plural  form.     Conip.  i.  284,  650,  ii.  331. 

53.   Soleranes ;    annual. Ordine ;    in  course;   one  after  the  othcr, 

according  fo  thc  usuul  order.     Gr.  g  247,  2,  3d  paragraph ;  Z.  §  472. 

54.  Strnere ni — douis ;  /  would  cover  with  thcir  appropriaic  sacrifccs.  To 
make  sticriliccs  to  a  hcro  after  his  dcatli,  as  a  god,  was  in  accordancc  with 
the  ancicnt  customs ;  sce  on  iii.  328  ;  Iicikc  Anchiscs  was  to  bc  honorcd  with 
nn  altar  and  sacrificcs. 55.  Nnnc  nltro  ;  r^ow  viorcorcr ;  brsidcs  (lie  mo- 


BOOK    FIFTH.  467 

live  T  sbould  have  to  kcep  the  day  anywherc,  and  under  the  niost  unfavora- 
ble  ■  circumstances,  I  have  now  this  great  encouragemcnt  added  thereto, 
that  I  am  on  the  very  ground,  at  the  very  tomb,  and  among  friends.  Tliiel 
renders  ^dtro^  instead  of  morcover,  "  without  our  agency," — involuntarihj, 

and  therefore,  as  said  below,  not  without  the  divine  will. 56.  Siae  mente, 

slne  nnniine;  without  the  purpose,  without  Ihe  loill. 58.  Ilonoreni ;  fcsti- 

val. 59.  Poseaiuas  vcntos  ;  let  us  pray  for  winds  ;  that  is,  after  pci'ibrm- 

ing  our  sacrifices  in  honor  of  Anchises.^  The  winds  were  conciliated  bv 
prayers  and  offerings.  See  below,  vs.  112-111 ;  iii.  253.  But  Lactantius 
understood  in  quoting  this  passage  that  it  was  of  Anchises  that  the  favora- 

ble  winds  were  asked. 60.  Velit ;  aml  that  he  (Anchises)  may  suffer  mc, 

when  my  city  shall  have  heen  huilt,  to  offer  ycarly  thcse  sacri-fices  in  tcmplcs 
(a  temple)  consccrated  to  him.      Vclit  dcpends  on  poscamuji,  connected  by  ut 

understood. 61,  62.  Blna  bonni  caplta  in  naves  ;  two  hcads  of  cattle  for 

each  of  the  ships.     Numero  qualifies  im«.     These  beasts  are  for  the  sacri- 

ficial  feast  which  is  immediately  celebrated  on  the  same  day. 64.  Si  is 

here  for  quum.     Comp.  vl.  829. 66.  Prinia  certaniina ;  I  will  fix  as  the 

Jirst  contests  (of  the  day) ;  the  real  sense  is,  I  will  appoint  contests,  the  first 
of  which  shall  be  those  of  the  swift  fleet.  It  was  tlie  custom  of  the  Greeks, 
imitated  to  some  extent  by  the   Romaus,  to  celebrate  funeral  rites  with 

games. 67.    VlribHS  andax  ;    confding  in  his  strength. 68.    Incedil 

mellor;  imlks  superivr;  a  livelier  expression  than  is  supcrior.     Comp.  i. 

4*j- Jacnlo  and  sagittis  are  coupled  together  as  belonging  to  the  same 

class  of  weapons  in  the  forthcoming  trials  of  skiil ;  namely,  those  that  art» 

aimed  at  a  mark. 69.  Sea  is  taken  in  its  strict  meaning,  or  if  answering 

to  the  foregoing  qtii — qui,  for  si  quis — si  quis  ;  if  any  excels — and  if  any 
walks  superior—or  if  (any  one)  dares  to  engage  in  battle  with  thc  cestus  of 

raw  hide. 71.  Ore  favete;    eixpri/if^Te ;   favor  ye  with  the  mouth;    keep 

solemn  silence.  This  was  the  common  formula  addressed  to  the  assembly 
by  the  priest  at  the  comraencement  of  religious  rites.  The  words  here,  and 
the  whole  A'erse,  refer,  not  to  the  future  games,  but  to  the  ceremonies  now 

inimediately  to  be  performed  at  the  tomb  of  Anchises. Ramis ;    with 

wrnaths;    also  the  custom  at  festivals. 72.  Materna ;    the   myrtle  was 

sacred  to  Venus. 73.  Ilelymns  ;  a  Sicilian,  friend  of  Acestcs,  also  of  Tro- 

jan  birth. Acvl.     Gr.  §  213,  R.  1,  (a). 77.  Eite  ;  the  order  and  form. 

were  essential  in  all  religious  worship. Mero  Baeciio ;  tliis  and  the  fol- 

lowing  ablatives  limit  carchcsia  as  abl.  of  description.     Gr.  §  211,  R.  C. 

78.  ilnuii.     See  on  i.  193. IVovo  ;  frcsh ;  just  from  the  dugs  of  the  cow. 

AU  offerings  to  the  gods  must  be  uncontaminated  by  common  use. 80. 

Iternm  salvete  ;  again  all  hail!     This  punctuation  of  Jahn  is  also  adopted 

by  Peerlkamp.     Others  join  iterum  with  salvc. 80,  81.  Receptl  neqnid- 

qnam  cincres;  yc  ashes(pimj  fdther')  rescued  in  vain;  in  vain  rcscued  from 
Troy  and  from  the  sea,  because  he  did  not  after  all  survive  to  reach  Italy. 
Comp.  iii.  711.     This  accords  with  tbe   following  non  licuif,   otc. 82. 


468  NOTES   ON    THE    AENEID. 

Fatalu  :  destined. 8S.  QaitiBqae  «st ;  vhaterer  (riTer)  it  is ;  foi  thei 

have  onlj  heard  the  name. Qiaf rrrc ;  s^pply  mt  or  mihi. 84.  lir» 

tis ;  the  inmost  part  of  the  shrine  is  in  this  case  the  interior  of  the  tomb. 
The  sn&ke  was  looked  upon  as  a  token  of  good,  and  his  form  was  supposed 
to  be  assnmed  bj  the  guardian  genius  of  a  place,  penius  locL  In  the  pres- 
ent  instance  it  is  uncertain  whe^her  it  is  ihe  genius  of  the  plaee  or  the  at- 

tendant  spirit  of  Anchises. 85.  Septeaa  ;  the  distributive  for  the  cardinaL 

The  hug*  serpent  drew  his  bodr  oui  from  the  base  of  the  tomb,  forming 
coil  aftor  coil  as  he  emerged  and  wound  himself  round  the  altar.     Serrius 

thought  the  seren  coils  trpical  of  the  seven  Tears"  vovage. 87,  SS.  Cii 

ut«a«ieteBt ;  we  hare  the  datire,  cui,  limiting  the  verb,  instead  of  the  geni- 
tive,  cHJms,  limiting  ieroa.  Comp.  L  448-  TTAow  fxicl-  arure  markx  (adomed), 
a»d  wkose  scales  a  briffktmsi  sj:-otied  *ciih  pold  lighted  up.  The  plural  terrja 
\s  happilv  chosen  with  reference  to  the  multiplied  coils  of  the  snake.  The 
'description  a  little  simplified  woold  be :  ''  whose  scaly  back  was  briliiantly 

marked  with  spots  of  azure  and  gold." 89.  3D0e — colons.   Comp.  iv.  TOl. 

Prove  the  quantitv  and  meaning  of  levia  by  scanning. 9S.    Depasta  ; 

wkiek  kad  been  tasted  (by  him.) 94.  Ho« — Klgi.^;    on  this  ccc-junt  the 

mune;    becanse  he   regards  it   as   a   good   omen. iBStairat   heBores: 

eemmeMces  aneie  the  sacrijices ;    because.they  have  been    disturbed.      So 

L«dew7g.     "  Repeats  the  sacrifices  made  the  year  before."    Forbiger. 

9T.  Xisrantes  terea ;  with  black  backs ;  for  the  case  of  terfia,  see  on  i.  228. 

Blaek  victirns  were  offered  to  the  Manes  and  deities  of  the  lower  worid. 

99.  Semis^os :  sent  up ;  the  ilanes  to  whom  sacrifices  were  offered,  were 
supposed,  when  the  spirit  was  invoked,  {animam  vocare,)  to  come  back  from 
the  lower  worid,  and  partake  of  tbe  sacrifice.- — 100.  Qaae  eBlqie  e»t 
e«pia ;  aecording  to  the  ability  ofeach.  Afl  make  theip  sacrificial  offeriags, 
:ind  all  partake  in  the  feast  which  accompanies  the  sacriSce. 

lCVl-So.  The  appointed  day  havirg  arrived,  the  games  are  opeied  with  3  race  of 
Trojan  shipe.  Foar  galleys  enter  the  lists :  the  Prisus,  commaiided  by  Mr.estbeas, 
ihe  Chimaera  by  Gyas,  ihe  Scylla  by  Cloaathns.  and  the  Centaurus  by  Serg^tos. 
The  tmnipet  gives  the  signal  for  Btartiiig,  aad  all  push  instantly  for  the  goal.  which  is 
a  rock  far  off  from  the  shore,  marked  by  a  bough  of  ilei.  Gyas  in  ihe  Chimaera  takes 
the  lead,  for.owed  by  Cloanthtis  in  the  Scylla  ;  the  Pristis  and  Centaur,  nnder  M^nes- 
thens  acd  Sergestos,  side  by  side  parsue  the  others.  As  they  spproach  the  eoal,  Me- 
Doetes,  the  old  pilot  of  the  Chimaera,  fears  the  rocks,  acd  keeps  too  far  away.  Tho 
Seylla  takes  advantage  of  ihe  error,  acd  shoots  between  the  Cuim."»cra  and  tbe  gool, 
and  having  paeaed  ronnd  it,  tnrEs  back  towards  the  shore,  leaving  Gyas  behind.  He 
in  his  fory  caets  the  pilot  overboard  and  takes  the  helm  bimself.  MeanwhUe  Mnee- 
tbeos  and  Sergesttis  sw«  vieing  with  each  other  to  pass  the  Chimaera.  Sergestns  at 
first  has  the  advantage,  bnt  only  by  a  part  of  the  ship'*  length,  and  in  h'8  casemess  to 
rocmd  the  goal  at  the  nearest  point,  rons  his  sUip  on  tbe  rocks.  The  Pristis  mshes 
by  and  now  strives  to  overtake  the  Scylla.  But  Cloanthus  prays  to  the  gods  of  the 
«ea,  with  whose  aid  his  ship  speeds  to  the  land  and  receives  the  first  prize,  whiie  that 
of  Maestheos  takes  the  second,  and  the  Chlmaem  the  third.  Sergestos  with  difficuity 
brings  fats  ship  to  lacd,  but  reeeires  a  reward  for  the  prescrvation  of  hie  sbrp  aod  hia 
trrw. 


BOOK    FIFTH.  469 

g|05<  Phaethontis  cqui;  t]ie  horses  of  the  sitn;  Phaethon,  rs  thc  son  of 

llDhon,  or  Sol,  rjeAios  cpafdoDv,  is  sometimes  put  for  Sol  himself 108t 

Pars  et  parati ;  a  par/ a/so  (besides  seeiug  the  Trojan  strangers)  6cm^  p?-e- 
pared  to  enter  into  the  contests.     Yor  the  plural  after  pars,  see  Gr.  §  205, 

R.  3,  (1). 110.  Sacri ;  tripods  are  called  sacred  because  they  are  so  fre- 

quently  chosen  by  devotees  as  offerings  to  the  gods  to  be  placed  in  their 

temples. Corouae ;    lureaths ;   we    learn    from    246,  309,  and  494,  that 

they  were  of  laurel  and  of  olive,  and  frora  269,  that  they  were  ornaraented 

with  bands,  or  vittae. 111.  Palmae;  branchcs  of  palm  were  to  be  borne 

in  the  hands  of  the  victors. 112.  Talentani;  a  talent  of  gold  and  {ox\q) 

of  silvcr. 113.  Tnba.     Thc  iuha  or  trumpet  was  invented  by  the  Etrus- 

cans,  and  not  employed  in  the  Homeric  age.     Tlie  truinpeter  is  Misenus. 

See  iii.  239. Coniniissos   lcdos ;  the   beginning  of  the  games.     We   have 

here  the  same  usage  of  the  participle  perfcct  as  above,  6.     See  note  on  that 

verse. 114-123.     The  race  of  galleys,  instead  of  the  Homeric  chariot 

race,  is  an  idea  original  with  Virgil,  and  has  produced  one  of  the  most  en- 

tertaining  passages  in  the  Aeneid. 114,  115.  Parcs  dcleitae;  selecfed  {hj 

Aeneas)  as  equal ;  but  not  in  respcct  to  size ;  equal  ia  sailing  qualities, 
which  in  this  case  must  have  been  learned  by  Aeneas  from  observation,  and 
which  must  havc  been  the  result  in  part  of  the  form  and  size  of  the  vessel; 
but  still  more,  perhaps,  of  the  training,  skill,  and  spnit  of  the  rowers. 
Thus  with  us  much  depends  on  the  "  model"  and  size  of  the  vessel,  but  also 
much  on  the  propelling  force  and  the  management  of  it ;  and  vesscls,  steam- 
ers,  yachts,  or  club  boats,  are  equally  matched,  or  enter  the  contest  onfair 
tcrms,  when  they  are  capable  of  attaining  a  degree  of  speed  equal  to  the 

average  of  their  class, 116.  Pristini  5  the  name  of  the  galley  is  indicated 

by  the  image  of  some  aniraal  or  monster,  used  as  the  figure-head. IIT. 

Jftox  Italns  Muesthcus  ;  soon  afterwards  the  Italian  Mnestheus;  destined  soon 
to  becorae  an  Italian,  aud  to  introduce  an  Italian  forra  as  a  substitute  for 
his  Trojan  name.  He  was  descended  frora  Assaracus,  and  Virgil  pays  a 
corapliment  to  the  Memmii  of  Rome  by  deriving  their  name  from  such  a 

hero. 118.  Ingenti  uiole  ;  Peerlkamp  joins  directly  with  iHy/<;«<e;?i;  hyge 

loith  hugc  bulk ;  comparing  the  Greek  fj.eyas  /j.eyedft ;  comp.  x.  842,  xii. 

040;  but  Wagner  understands,  the  vast  Chimaera  of  vast  hcight. 119, 

Urbis  opns,  for  urbis  instar ;  as  great  as  a  citg.  S5  Stat.  Theb.  vi.  86 : 
Montis  opus,  cumulare  pyram  ;  to  heap  up  a  pyre  as  big  as  a  mountain.  > 
Triplici  Tcrsn ;  in  triple  tiers ;  there  are  three  banks  (ordines)  of  oars  on 
<^ach  side  of  the  ship,  Vessels  were  not  so  constructed  in  the  heroic  tiraes, 
nor  until  three  centuries  before  the  Peloponnesian  war.     Thucyd.  1,  13. 

120.  Terno  ordine  is  an  epexegesis,  or  repetition  of  thought  in  another 

forra  for  greater  distinctness. 122.  Ccutanro  ;  ferainine,  as  the  name  of 

a  ship.     See  Gr.  §  29,  2. 125.  Olini ;  at  times. 126.  Cori,  (or  Cauri,] 

the  north-west  winds. 127.  Tranqnillo  ;  whc7i  the  sea  is  calm  ;  ablative 

absoliitc,  with  mari  undcrstood.     See  Gr.  §  257,  R.  9,  (2);  Z.  §  646  ;  comp. 


470  NOTES    ON    TIIE    AENEID, 

i.  737. Silet ;  it  is  stlll ;  there  is  no  noisc  of  thc  waves  dashiug  up^  iU 

Tnda;  out  of  the  wave.     Comp.  i.  535. 128.  Campns  and  statio  are 

in  apposition  with  illa ;  a  plain  and  a  resort  for  the  sun-loving  sea-birds. 

130,  131.  lndc  sclreut ;  a  rclative  clause  denoting  a  purpose;  that  they 

,might  knoiv  froin  thcnce  to  come  back,  and  tliere  to  fetch  round  their  long 
courses.     If  the  adverbs  here  wcre  intcrrogative  we  should  require  at  before 

scirent,  and  the  subjunctivc  instead  of  reverti  and  circumflectere. 132. 

Sortc ;  thcre  was  a  choice  of  starting  places,  for  thcsc  would  diflfcr  some- 
what  in  direction  from  the  goal ;  some  naturally  giving  the  outcr  and  otlicrs 

the  inner  course. 134.  Popnlea.     The  poplar  was  sacred  to  Hercules, 

because  hc  brought  it  into  thc  uppcr  world  wheii  he  descended  to  liades  to 
seize  the  dog  Cerberus.  Being  sucrcd  to  Ilercules,  the  god  of  toil,  it  was 
worn  as  a  wreatli  by  those  who  wcre  about  to  engage  in  severe  labor,  such 
as  that  of  rowing.  Thus  Uorace,  0.  1,  7,  23,  makcs  Tcucer  put  on  a  poplar 
wreath,  when  on  thc  point  of  resuming  his  vo^Mge,  and  encountering  new 
hardships;  '^  l^mpora  populea  fertur  vinxisse  corona.''^  Others  undCrstand 
the  poplar  wreath  to  have  reierence  to  the/««e)'ert/  character  of  the  games. 

136.  Transtris.     Comp.  iv.  573. 131.  Intcnti ;  eagcr ;  thcir  breath- 

less  suspcnse,  as  they  await  the  signal,  is  well  exprcssed  by  the  same  verb 
{intenti)  as  that  which  describes  their  attitude,  with  arms  stretchcd  to  the 
oars,  {intenta  remis,)  ready  to  niake  a  long  and  powerful  "  strokc  "  at  a  mo- 

ment's  warniug. 137,   138.    Exsnltantia — cnpido;    throbblng  fcar,  (thc 

trcmbling  liope  of  success,)  and  the  intcnse  desire  of  glory  thrill  their  pant- 

ing  breasis. Ilanrit  is  understood  by  Thicl  in  tho  sense  of  penetrating 

deeply ;  for  an  excitcniont  which  pervades  the  whole  man,  is  one  by  which 
hc  is  also  spcnt  or  cxhaustcd  ;_  hcnce  to  say  haurirc  tor  pa-tcntare  is  oniy  to 
put  the  cflcct  for  the  cause.     Thc  same  use  of  the  verb  is  found  ia  G.  iii. 

Iu5. 140.  Prosiluere;  spirang  forth  from  tlicir  places ;  the  ships  seem  as 

animated  as  the  horses  in  the  chariot  race. 141.  Versa  is  taken  by  For  ^ 

biger  from  verro,  to  sweep  ;  but  the  usual  rendcriug,  "  upturned,"  from  ver- 

tere,  is  strongcr. Addactis  laccrtis  ;  the  means  of  versa  ;  throicn  vp  by 

their  straining  anns ;  litcrally,  by  their  arms  draivn  to  (the  breast) ;  i.  c. 
when  making  thc  stroke,  or  puUing  the  oar.     Compare  the  i^assagc  with 

viii.   089. 142.  Paritcr ;  side  by  side.     Comp.  ii.  205. 143.    Rostris 

tridrutibus;  thc  roAra  or  beaks  wcre  thrcc  mctallic  points  projcctiug  hori- 

zontally  fruin  tlie  prow  of  thc  ship. 144.  IVon  tain  praecipites,  sq. ;  nol 

ao  iiv/fily,  &c.     Comp.  Ilom.  Od.  xiii.  81-85  ;  U.  xxiii.  002-372. BijngO 

certaniine ;   in  the  two-horse  chariot  race. 14.').  Corripncre ;   take  {have 

laken')  the  plain  ;  strike  upon  the  track.  For  this  sense  of  corripcre,  to  hur- 
ry  upon,  see  also  i.  418.     The  perfcct  hcre  and  iii  117,  are  examples  of 

this  tense  used  to  denote  what  is  customary. EflTnsl  carcf  re ;  pouring 

forth  from  the  barricr ;  literaliy, /iai7'n(/  bccn  piourcd  forth.  The  carcera 
are  the  stalls  in  which  the  chariots  arc  eonfincd  until  thc  signal  is  given  for 
star'.ing. 146.  inimiH^is;  running  nt  full  spcrd. I4T.  Jnjtii^j  for  r^MW 


BOOK    FIFTH.  47i 

Translate,  nor  thus  (nor  so  vigorously  as  the  Trojan  sailors)  do  thc  chariot- 
ecrs  shake  thc  fiowing  reins  over  (to)  the  horses  running  at  full  speed,  nnd 
hend  forivard  to  thc  lash ;  literally,  inclining  hang  for  or  unto  Uows ;  for 
giving  blows.     Cliarioteers  stood  up  and  leaned  over  towards  tlie  horses ; 

so  they  are  represented  in  ancient  statuary. 149t  Consonat ;  isfillcd  ivi/h 

the  sound. 149,  150.  Inclasa  litor.l ;  the  shores  shut  in;  wooded  hills  en- 

closc  the  shore,  and  thus  the  shouting  is  the  more  loudly  re-echoed. 

150.  Resnltant;  reverberate. 152.  Tnrbani  inter  frcniitnmqne ;  a^nid^t 

the  crowd  (the  press  of  the  slilps)  and  confuscd  shouting ;  Gyas  shoots  for- 
ward  from  between  the  other  galleys,  which  arc  crowded  together,  whilc 

the  din  of  voices  and  the  noise  of  the  oars  add  to  the  confusion. 153. 

Dlclior  remis  ;  superior  in  his  oarsmen. Pinns ;  the  ship. 154.  Aeqno 

discrimine;  at  an  equal  distance  from  the  Scylla. 155.  L0':nm  priorem; 

tbey  are  running  side  by  side,  each  striving  to  get  before   the   other. 

157,  158.  Jnnctis  frontibns;  tvith  evcn  protus. 158.  Longa  snkant  vada 

cariiiaj  they  furrow  the  briny  waters  icith  their  long  kecls,  (with  the  long 

keel.)     Some  editions  have  longe  ;  far  along ;  but  comp.  x.  197. 159. 

Mctsim  tenebat ;   were  nearing  the  goal ;  ,epexegetical. 160.   Princeps  ; 

foremost;  i.  e.  in  the  race  thus  far. Gargite  y  the  boiling  waves. 162. 

Qnoabis?  whither  are  you  bearing  away  so  nnich  to  the  right? Dexter 

here,  like  medius  above,  'Ze  et  al.,  agrees  with  the  subject,  and  designates 

»the   situation   or   direction. Blilli   is   the   dativus   ethicus. ^^Gressnm  ; 

course. 163.  Ama ;  h^ig  the  shore  and  let  the  oar  blade  graze  thc  rocks 

on  the  left.  For  stringat,  depending  on  sijie,  sufi^er,  see  Gr.  §  262,  E.  4. 
They  turn  thc  goal  to  the  left  and  gain  time  by  making  the  turn  as  ncar  to 

it  as  possible. 165.  Pelagi ;  of  the  dcep  water. 16S.  Divcrsns,  for  in 

diversam  partem ;    a  usage  similar  to  that  of  dexter,   abovc. Iteram ; 

again  cried  {called  back)  Gyas  with  a  shout,  "steer  for  the  rocks."     Thc 

particle  re  signifies  here  back  to  tbe  proper  track. 168.  Respt(it;  he 

looks  back  and  sees ;    literally,  he   looks   back   upon. Instantem  tergo  ; 

pressing  upon  the  stern  of  his  ship. Propiora ;    the  placcs  or  course 

ncarer  the  goal. ITO.  Radit  iter;  shoots  along  the  left-hand  way. In- 

tcrior  ;  betwecn  Gyas  and  the  rocks.     Comp.  xi.  G9o. Priorem  ;  the  one 

in  advance  of  him ;  the  just  now  princcps  Gyas. 172.  Jnveni ;  in  the 

dative  instead  of  the  gcnitivc. 1T4.  Sociam  salatis;  his  comradcs  would 

be  in  danger  without  a  pilot  to  guide  thc  ship. 1T5.  Pnppi  ab  Jilta ;  the 

pilofs  seat  was  elevated  above  the  deck  at  the  extreme  "  after  part "  of  tlie 

ship. 176.  Rector,  magister ;  helmsman,  pilot. 178.  Gravis  ;  moving 

slowly. 179.  Jam  senior  ;  this  is  one  reason  for  gravis ;  another  is  flu- 

ens;  dripping. 181,  182.  Riscrc  et  rident;   thcy  laughed  at  hiin  both 

tvhen  sinking'  and  when  swimming,  and  they  (how)  laugli  at  him  (seated  on 

the  rock)  and  belching  thc  salt  loaves  frorn  his  breast. 183.  Hic  ;  an  ad- 

verb  of  time ;  now. Daobns  ;  dative  after  accensa  est,  but  not  from  any 

governing  powcr  herc  in  the  preposition  ad. 184.  Mnostlifl ;   for  thia 


472  NOTES   ON    THE    AENEID 

forin  of  the  dativc,  sce  Gr.  §  86.     The  word  is  hcre  a  dissyllable. Snper* 

'are  depcnds  011  the  phrasc  rpcs  cst  acccnsa,  for  sperabant  or  cacpcrunt  spera- 

re. 185.  AntC  stands  bcforc  /oc«?rt  without  governing  it;  comp.  sxper, 

ii.  348, ;  tlie  place  before  (that  of  the  other) ;  nor  yet  was  he  first  by  thc  vhole 

keel  preceding. 187.  RO!»tro;  ^dth  her  bcak ;  hav  heak  is  close  opposite 

to  tbe  side  of  the  Centaur. 190.  Ilettorci  5  Ilectorean  ;  a  niore  cxcitijig 

term  \ha.n  Dardanidae ;  for  it  reminds  ihcm  that  thcy  are  both  kinsmcn 

and  companions  of  tlie  grcat  Hector. Sorte  snprema ;  in  the  final  ovcr- 

lUrow. 192.  Gactulis  syrtibns;    on  thc  African  qnickscmds ;  these  and 

the  lonian  sea  and  Malean  promontory  are  mcntioncd  as  the  most  trying 
dangers  thcy  had  met  with.  Malea,  now  St.  Angclo,  the  sontlicrn  pronion- 
tory  of  Lacouia,  was  so  dangerous  that  it  became  a  synonyme  for  dangerous 
uavigation.  Taubmann  quotes  the  provcrb  used  by  Erasmus :  Malcam  le- 
gens,  quae  domi  siint  oblivisci ;  to  forgct  the  dangers  at  home,  while  eoasting 

by  Malca. 193.  Scqnatibns  nndis  ;  07i  the  wavcs  (of  Malca)  closely  crov:d- 

ing  on  each  olher. 194.    Prima ;    uscd  substantively ;    ra  npuiTem;   the 

first  prize. Mucsthcns  ;  even  I  Mnestlieus,  a  Trojan  prince,  aslc  nothing 

more. 195.    Qnaniqnam;    for.- the  aposiapesis  or  interruptio,  scc  on  i. 

135. Iloi' ;  w/«  this;  so  far  as  this ;  referring  to  the  preceding  words 

pudent  cxtremos  rediisse ;  tJius  far  eonquer,  fricnds.     Otliers  malic  hoc  agree 

with  ncfas ;    ;^w<  doivn  this  disgrace,  friends ;  forbid  this  shame. 199. 

Sabtraliitnr  solum  ;  thc  smface  of  the  sea  is  drawn  bencath  them  ;  their  speedr, 
is  so  furious  that  the  watcr  itself  appears  to  be  in  swift  motion,  lil<e  a  river, 
and  to  swcep  away  beneath  the  vessel.     Solum  is  applied  to  thc  surface  of 

the  sea. 19?,  209.  Tnm— rivis  ;  from  the  Iliad,  xvi.  lOS),  110. 201. 

Ipse  casns;  chance  ilseJf. 202.  Fnrcns  animi.    Gr.  §  213,  R.  1,  (a);  Z. 

§437. 203.  luiqno ;  too  narrow ;  there  was  not  room  enougli  bctwccn 

Ibe  Pristis  on  his  right  and  tbe  rocks  on  his  left. 201.  Procnrrcntibns ; 

rocks  jutting  out ;  but  covcred  by  tbe  water,  and  hence  cacca,  as  tbcy  are 

called  in  164. 205.  Mnricc;  the  oars  striking  (baving  struggled)  on  thc 

jagged  rock  were  brokcn  tvith  a  crash.  Crepucre  hcre  cxprcsses  our  convcr- 
salional  term  wcre  smashed.     Murex,  a  kind  of  shcll-fish  wbicb  terminatcs  in 

a  sliarp  point;  bence  applicd  to  sharp-pointcd  roeks. 206.  Illisa;  the 

prow  having  bcen  dashed  on  the  rocks  hiivg  siispcndvd.  "Whenevcr  the  wave3 
receded  or  rcturncd,  tbe  other  part  of  tbe  sbip  vibratcd  up  and  down,  or 

from  side  to  sidc,  but  not  the  proc. 207.  Masui)  clamorc  niorantnr ; 

tlicy  dclay  with  a  great  outcry ;  thc  idca  is  that  tinding  tbemselves  suddenly 
delayed  in  tbe  race,  tbey  cxpress  thcir  vcxation  and  alarm  in  confuscd 
clamors.     At  the  same  time  tbey  strive  to  pusb  tbc  gallcy  from  tbe  rocks 

and  gatber  up  the  brokcn  oars  from  thc  water. 211.  Agraiuc  remorDm, 

for  remigio ;  with  the  movenient  of  the  oars. Vcntisqne  vocatis;  and  hai'- 

ing  invokcd  ihe  winds ;  be  employs  tbcrcfore  both  sails  and  oars. 212. 

Pronu  niariii,  for  aequora  secunda ;  favorable  waters ;  tbat  is,  the  waters 
tiow  uuobstrui-tctl  by  any  rock  or  ship  in   \ho  wity  ;  n  tlear  and   opcn  soa. 


BOOK    FIFTH.  473 

Soine  take  prona  literally;  inclinini/,  or  slopinr/,  doicmvard,  towards  the 
shore ;  such  being  the  appcarance  of  thc  surface  of  the  watcr  when  seen 

from  land. 215,  21G.  Estcrrita  tccto  ; //%/tic«e<Z/ro?>i  her  home  (in  the 

hollow  roclcs.) PlaiiSBUi  penuis  dat  iugcntcm;  claps  aloud  hcr  wings. 

lagenteni  is  said  in  contrast  with  thc  still  motion  of  the  bird  which  immcdi- 

ately  follows ;  the  noise  in  itself  is  not  ingens. 213.  Sic  Mcestlieus  ;  sc 

Mnesthens,  so  the  Fristls  hcrsclf. 218,  219.  Fltima  acqaora ;  the  farthcst 

part  of  the  course,  at  the  goaL 220.  In  SCOpnlo  alto ;  on  the  high  project- 

ing  rock ;  procurrentibus  saxis.    Comp.  204.       Allo  is  saiJ  relativcly  to  the 

general  level  of  the  surrounding  sea. 221.  Vadis ;  the  shallows  about 

the  rock. 224.  ConseqEitnr ;   overtakes. ('cdit ;  she  falls  hehind;  al- 

lows  the  other  ship  to  pass  her. 227.  Cniieti ;  all  the  spectators. Se- 

qnentem ;  Mnesthea  or  illum  understood. 228.  Stndiis  ;  with  ardent  ap- 

plause. 229.  Proprium ;  the  crew  of  the  Scylla  regard  the  victory  as 

already  their  own. Partam  ;  (already)  won;  which  they  have  secured. • 

231«  Hos  alit;  success  strengthens  thcse ;  the  crew  of  Mncstheus.  Comp. 
succesu  acrioripso,  210.  The  same  idea  is  contained  in  the  following  words: 
possnnt  quia  possc  Tldcntnr ;  their  very  prospcct  of  victory  increascs  their 

power;  theg  caii  (so  much  the  morc)  because  they  think  they  can. 232. 

Fors  =/ors27an;  perhapis ;   as  in  ii.   139. 233.  Ponto;  to  (or  towards) 

the  sea;  for  adpontum.    Comp.  i.  6. 1'trasqne  ;  for  utramque  or  ambas  ; 

so  below,  855,  and  vi.  G85.     The  plural  is  propcrly  used  only  when  each  of 

the  two  objects  referrcd  to  is  plural. 234.  In  vota  ;  to  his  vows ;  to  bear 

witness  to  his  vows.  A  vow  or  conditional  promise  was  attachcd  to  a 
prayer;  some  ofFering  was  to  be  made  on  condition  that  the  gods  should 
fnlfil  the  wishes  of  the  suppliant.  If  the  prayer  is  answered,  the  suppliant 
will  then  be  bound  to  fulfil  his  promise, — hound  hy  his  vow — reus,  or  dani' 
natus,  voti;  the  genitive  voti  in  this  phrase  is-under  Gr.  §  213,  R.  1,  (adjec- 
tives  denoting  guilt  or  innocence,)  and  §  217,  R.  3,  (b) ;  Z.  §  446,  note  1. 
The  expression  votis  vocare,  to  call  with  vows  or  prayers,  (see  i.  290,  whcre 

votis  is  merely  the  manner,)  must  be  distinguishcd  frora  in  vota  vocare. 

235.  Aeqnora ;    the  accusative  aftcr  curro,  I  traverse,   takcn  transitively. 

See  Gr.  §  232,  (2) ;  Z.  §  383. 238.  Porriciam  ;  a  term  used  especially  in 

rehgious  language.     Varro  de  re  rust.,  1,29:  exta  deis  quum  dabant,  porri- 

cere  dicebant. Liqnentia ;  the  i  is  short  in  the  first  syllable.     Comp.  1. 

432. 240.  Nercidnm ;  the  Nereids  were  the   daughters  of  Nercus  and 

Doris,  said  to  be  fifty  in  number. Pliorci ;  Phorcus  ;  the  son  of  Po7itus 

and  Gaia,  and  brother  of  Nereus. Panopea  yirgo  ;  the  virgin  Panopca  ; 

one  of  the  nymphs  conspicuous  in  their  number. 241.    Mann  magna ; 

with  hia  great  hand ;  as  below,  487.     Gods  and  heroes  were  larger  than 

mere  men. Portonns,  or  Porti^nnus,  was  the  Roman  name  of  the  Grecian 

Melicertes.     His  peculiar  office  was  to  protcct  vcssels  coming  into  port. 

The  tcrm  pater  is  applied  to  most  of  the  deities,  as  here  to  Portunus. 

Enntem ;  join  with  illam  (the  ship)  undcrstood. 243.  Fngit,  condidit; 


474 


NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 


tbis  combmatiou  of  the  liistorical  prcsenl  with  the  perfect,  without  any  im- 
portant  difierence  of   mcaning,   is    frequeut  in 

poetiy. AltO  f    reccdhirj  ;  deep  inland  ;    with- 

drawing  back  far  from  thc  sca. 244.  Ex  often 

signifies   accordinf/   to ;    growing    out   of,    origi- 

nating  from. Cnadis ;  all,  that  is,  who  liad 

been  engaged  in  tlie  contest. 246.  .idvelal ; 

less  commonplacc  than  civgit. 24?,  2i8.  (;[>- 

tiiro,  ferre ;  for  opiatidos,  fercndum ;  he  prc- 
sents  several  bullocks,  thrcc  of  which  are  to  be 
chosen  by  each  of  the  four  (some  under^stand 

three)  commanders  for  his   own   crcw. 248. 

Vina — talentnni ;  he  c/ivcs  ivinc  and  a  grcat  talcnt 
of  silvcr  to  be  carried ;  also  to  cach  of  the  four 

ships. 250.  Anratam ;  interwovcn  with  gold; 

auri   subtetnine. 250,  251.    Qnnm — cncnrrit; 

Melicertes,  or  Portunus.       freely  transktcd,   "around  which  ran  a  waving 

border  of  Mehboean  purple  in  two  broad  stripes." Plarinia,  literally, 

very  tnuch,  agrecing  with  purpura,  refers  to  the  width  of  the  border. 

Qlaeandro  dnplici;  in  a  double  maze;  in  two  mcandering  and  parallel  lincs. 
The  Mcander  is  a  river  of  Asia  Minor,  remarkable  for  its  winding  course. 

Melibooa,  (used  liere  adjcctivcly,)  was  a  town  on  thc  coast  of  Thessaly. 

252.  Intcxtns ;  embroidcred  upon  it,     Two  sccnes  are  reprcsented  on 

the  mantle ;  one  the  chase,  in  which  Ganymede  is  hunting  the  stag  on 
Mount  Ida;  in  thc  othcr  the  eagle  of  Jupiter  is  bearing  Ganymede  up  to 

thc  sky. 254.  Anholanti  similis  ;  like  one  panting ;  the  picture  is  hfe-like. 

Ab  Ida  ;  join  witli  rapuit. 255.  Jovis  armigcr ;  the  eagle  was  rcpre- 

sented  as  bearing  in  his  claws,  the  thunderbolts  of  Jupiter;  just  as  iu  oui 

national  ensign  he  bears  a  bunch  of  arrows. 256.  Longacvi;   the  old 

men,  guardians  of  thc  youth,  are  stretching  their  hands  in  despair  towards 
the  eagle  as  lie  ascends,  while  the  dogs,  resting  on  thcir  haunches,  bark 

furiously  at  the  supposcd  bird  of  prey. 257.  In  anras  ;  bccause  they  are 

looking  upwards. 258.  Qni  dciudc;  Mncsihcus. 259.  Hamis  conser- 

tam  sq.     Sce  on  thc  same  words,  iii.  407. 260.  Ipse  ;  Aeneas. 261. 

Ilio  alto;  an  instancc  of  hiatus.     Thc  o  is  madc  short.     See  Gr.  §  305,  ("2). 

262.  Haberc;  hr  habcndam. Yiro;  in  apjjosition  with /<«ic;  <o /u'/«, 

a  hero. 266.  Lcbetas.     Gr.  §8(3. 267.  Aspcra  signis  ;  embossed  wiih 

figures;    caclata. 269.    Tacniis;    scanned   herc   as   a   dissyllable.     Tlie 

wrcaths  wcrc  formcd  of  lcaves  held  together  by  fillets,  which  also  bound 

thcm  to  thc  head.     Scc  on  110. 270.  Arte  implies  botb  skill  and  labor. 

• 271.  Ordinc  dcbilis  uno;  litcrally,  crimdcd  in  rsspcct  to  onc  row ;  but 

nearly  all  the  best  commcntators  take  ordine  herc  for  latcre ;  in  respect  to 
onc  sidc;  for  all  thc  oars  on  the  Icft  sidc  werc  lost  or  brokcn.  By  a  natural 
liirn  of  l.uiguago  tho  tcrms  nscucd  and  rrijipfcd  arc  npplicil  (o  llic  coni- 


BOOK   FIFTH. 


475 


mander  himsclf,  Sergest  ,js,  instead  of  the  ship.     So  now  we  oltcn  hear  nau- 
tical  men,  when  watching  a  vessel  at  a  distance,  say,  "  he  has  lost  hin  top" 


Ganymede  and  the  eagle. 

mast,"  "  his  coming  round,"  and  the  like,  having  in  mind  the  captain  as 

representing    the    vessel. 272.     Irrisam;     disgraccd. 2T3.    Qnalis. 

Comp.  i.  430,  and  note. ^Saepe ;  as  in  i.  148. ^Yiae  in  aggcre ;  not 

on  the  raised  part  of  the  road,  but  simply  on  the  raised  surface  of  the  road. 
The  highway,  especially  with  the  Romans,  is  an  agger,  a  post  road  so  con- 

structed  as  often  to  rise  above  the  ground  on  either  side. 274.  Obli- 

qnnni;  lying  across  the  tracK Icta;   join  with  gravis ;  heavy  loith  his 

blows;  i,  e.  who  deals  heavy  blo^vs. 275.  Saxo  ;  with  astone ;  join  with  both 

adjectives,  semincccm  and  laccrum  ;  mangled  and  Jialf  killed  with  the  stone. 

276-279.  Neqnidqnam — plicantcm;  invainhe  throios  forth  long  tcr.iths 

ivith  his  bocly,  while  attempting  to  flcc  ;  in  one  part  ficrce,  glowing  wit)    hia 
eyei  and  stixtching  high  his  hissing  necJc ;  (tho  otlicr)^ari  cripplcdh    i^t 


476  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

wouml,  hold.1  him  hach  (though)  sfnir/^linf/  (lo  foroc  liimsclf  forward)  on  hts 

twixted  coils  (jiiodis),  and  winding  hi)nself  into  his  ownfolds. 279.  Nixan» 

tcni  rcfers  to  thc  miwoundvd  poition  of  his  body  first  dcscribed ;  with  thii 
he  vainly  strugglcs  to  pull  himself  along,  not  by  gliding  or  crccping  in  the 
usual  manner  of  snakes,  but  by  throwing  hinisclf  mto  contortions ;  each 
knot,  undulation,  or  coil,  serving  as  a  sort  of  lever.  The  snake  oftcn  maiies 
this  convulsivc  cfibrt  whcn  wounded.  Thus  the  ship  is  cripplcd  on  one 
sidc,  60  that  with  hcr  rcmaining  oars  she  is  incapable  of  advancing ;  and 
here  ends  the  resemblance  to  the  snake.  But  yct,  (iainen,)  notwithstanding 
the  loss  of  a  part  of  her  oars,  and  hcr  inability  to  advancc  with  the  aid  of 
those  that  rcmain,  she  is  brought  iuto  tlie  harbor  slowly  with  the  hclp  of 

hcr  sails. 282.  Promisso  ninnere.     No  particuhir  reward  has  been  mcn- 

tioned  in  the  narrative,  but  we  may  infer  from  305,  that  in  the  sbip  race 

also  none  was  to  go  unrewarded. 284.  Datnr  lengthcns  the  last  syUable 

here. Opernm  Mincrvae  ;  the  use  of  the  needle  and  distaff. 285.  Bfatl ; 

supply  dantur,  suggested  by  datur. 

286-361.  Dcpcription  of  the  foot-race.  Aeneas  chooscs  a  circular  meadow,  encirclcd 
by  wooded  hills,  aa  a  circus  or  race  ground.  Ile  invitcs  all  wlio  wish  to  m.ike  tri.il  of 
tlieir  ppecd  in  a  foot  race  to  prcecnt  thempelves.  Thc  most  prominent  competitora 
are  Nisus,  Euryalus,  Biorcs,  Salius,  Patron,  Ilclymuf,  and  Panopcs.  Nisu»  takes  the 
lead,  Salius  is  ncxt,  and  third  Euryalus,  followcd  by  llclymus  and  Diorcs.  Ncar  tlie 
goal  Nisus  falls  down,  but  givcs  the  victory  to  his  fricnd  EuryaUis  by  tripping  up  Sa- 
lius.  Uelymus  t.akes  the  sccond  prize  and  Diorcs  thc  third.  Thc  idca  of  tiie  foot  race 
is  suggestcd  by  II.  x.xiii.  740-797. 

286.    IIoc  misso  ccrtiuuine  \    fhis  contest  bcivg  finished;    litcrally,  de- 

sjiatched. 287,   288.  Qnem — silvae;    which  woods  on  curving  hills  siir- 

rounded  on  all  sides  ;  which  wood-covercd  hills  encirclcd. 288.  In  vallc 

tlieatri ;  in  thc  niidst  of  the  valley  which  resemblcd  a  thcatre;  theatri  limits 

valle,  not  circus.     Circus  means  here  race  course,  or  stadium. 290.  Cou- 

sessn.  The  constmction  and  sense  are  vcry  doubtful.  If  it  be  taken  as  a 
dative  for  in  consessum,  thc  transkition  will  bc,  whithcr  the  hcro  proceeded  in 
the  midst  of  7nani/  thousands  to  the  asscmbli/,  and  sat  down  on  a  high  srat, 
{exst)-ucto.)  But  Scrvius  and  some  others  after  him  have  taken  it  with  ex- 
structo  to  signify  clcvafcd  scat,  though  that  is  an  unauthorized  nicaning  of 

the  Avord. ^91.  Qul  has  for  its  antcccdcnt  corum  ;  animos  corum  qui. 

294.  Nisns — pnorl ;  Xisus  distinguishcd  for  his  affcctionate  love  for  tht 

boij  (Euryahis.) 298.  Patron  was  perhaps  one  of  the  pcrsons  scnt  by 

Ilclenus  to  accompany  Aenoas. 299.  Tegeaeac  ;  Tegazan;  from  Tcgaca, 

a  town  in  Arcadia. 300.  llelymns  was  a-friend  of  Acestcs,  mcntioncd 

above,  73. 391.  Accstiie.     Sce  i.  105. 306.  Gnosia  ;  Crctan. Lc- 

vat )  liicida  ferro  ;  gliticring  wiih  pnlished  stccl ;  i.  c.  at  the  point. 307. 

rachltani ;  cinhosscd  with  silver ;  having  a  silvcr  liandle  cmbosscd  or  carvcd 

witli   figurcs. Fcrre,  for  ferrcudam,  as  abovc,  218,  202,  et  al. 308. 

Pracmia;  prizes ;  to  be  distingui.shcd  hcie  from  honos,  the  prescnt  wliicii 
nas  to  bc  conunon  to  all ;  whcrcas  thc  prir.cs  arc  only  tlircc  in  numbor.— — 


BOOK    FIFTH.  477 

309.  Capnt ;  a  Greek  accusative  limiting  necientur.     See  on  i.  228. 310» 

Phaleris  insigneM;  adornedwith  trappings;  these  wcre  straps  of  leatber  or 
bands  of  metal,  mounted  with  silver  or  golden   ornaments,  and  fastened 

about  the  neck  and  head  of  the  horse. 311,  312.  Amazouiaai,  Threidis. 

These  are  mere  appellatives  here,  signifying  such  a  quiver  and  sucli  arrows 
as  Amazons  and  Thracians  use ;  for  both  races  were  renowned  as  archers. 

312.  LatO  anro  ;  an  ablative  of  description  after  balteiis ;  Gr.  211,  IJ.  (' ; 

a  belt  of  broad  gold ;th.a.t  is,  broad  and  gilded. Circnniplectitar.     Tlie 

belt  (as  seen  in  some  antique  representations  of  the  quiver)  passed  rouml 
the  quiver,  and  the  two  ends  were  joined  together  by  the  buckle  or  brcoch. 

313.  Tereti  gemnia  ;  o/",  or  ivith  tapering  jeicel ;  a  jejrelled  clasp  ;  the 

ablative  like  auro  above.     Translatc,  around  ichich  passes  a  broad  gilded 

belt,  and  a  buckle  with  smooth  gem  fastens. 31i.  ArgOiica  gaiea  \  some 

Grecian  helmet,  which  had  either  becn  captured  or  rcceived  as  a  prc^ent  by 

Aeneas.     See  ii.  889,  iii.  468. 315.  Locani  capinnt ;  each  one  takes  his 

place  for  starting.     Comp.  above,   132. 316.   Corripinnt  spatia;   they 

rush  foncard  on  the  course.     Comp.  above,  145,  aud  i.  418. Liuien;  the 

starting-point. 31T.   Nimbo  similcs;    like  a  storm. litima  signant; 

mark  the  farthest  point ;  that  is,  with  the  eye ;  for  without  fixing  the  eye 

on  the  goal  they  may  turn  from  a  direct  line. 318.  Corpora ;  for  ihe 

persons  themselvcs. 310.  Fulminis  alis ;  than  the  wings  of  the  ihunder- 

bolt ;  than  tlie  winged  thunderboli.  The  thuuderbolt  was  represeuted  by  the 
ancient  artists,  not  only  emitting  rays  of  light,  and  flashing  fire  from  each 

extremity,   but  also  with   wings,   to   denote  its  swiftness. 320.    Longo 

proximns  intervallo ;  so  Cic.  Brut.  47,  173 :  Duobus  smnmis,  L.  Pliilippus 
proximus  accedebat,  sed  longo  intervallo  tame7i  pToximus.     Liue  320  is  spon- 

daic. 321.  Deinde  is  joined  with  sequiiur  understood  ;  post  with  rclicto 

governing  eum  understood. 323.  Qno  snb  ipso;  close  behind  whom,  evei. 

him  ;  Forbiger  understands  ipse  here,  and  in  iii.  5,  to  mean  directly,  itnme- 

diately. 321.  Calcem  terit  jam  calce ;  and  even  now  rubs  heel  with  hecl , 

i.  e.foot  withfoot;  he  is  even  now  running  almost  abreast  with  Ilelymus, 

lacking  only  a  pace  of  it. 325.  Spatia  plnra  ;  for  jylus  spatii.     The  pres- 

ent  subjunctive  after  si  here  is  substituted  for  tho  imperfect,  for  the  sake 

of  greater   animation.      Comp.  i.  58. 326.   Transeat,  rclinqnat ;    "the 

poets  sometimes  use  the  present  subjunctive  instead  of  the  pluperfect." 

Madvig,  347,  b,  obs.  3. 326.  Prior ;  the  comparative  in  preference  to 

primus,  as  only  two,  Helymus  and  Diores,  are  referred  to.  Ambiguum ; 
Heyne  regards  the  adjective  here  as  mascuUne,  translating,  would  have  left 
hivi  (Helymus)  uncertain  (of  the  victory.)  Forbiger  quotcs  H.  iii.  382,  as 
sustaining  this  interpretation.  Others  take  ambiguum  as  an  indefinite  neu- 
ter ;  thus  the  sense  would  be,  he  would  have  left  it  (the  thing,  or  the  result) 

uncertain. 327.  Spatio  extremo ;  in  the  farthest  part  of  the  course  ;  the 

ultima  mentioned  in  317.  So  Peerlkamp,  followed  by  Forbiger.  Othera 
■anderstand  the  point  from  which  thcy  had  started,  which  would  be  the  ter- 


478  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

minating  poiiit  of  thc  racc  if  thcy  wcrc  running  in  tbe  rcgular  studiuin  oi 

circus. 32S.  Snb  finem  ;  ncar  to  the  end;  defining  niore  preeiscly  thc 

preceding  word.-. Lfvi  sanyuinc;  in  smooth,  that  is,  slippcry,  blood ;  the 

ablative  of  situation.     Victims  had  bcen  slaughtercd  on  the  spot;  as  is  im- 

plied  in  sacro,  333. 329.  Ut  may  be  translated  here,  where.      Ut,  liicc  wj, 

whcn  it  introduccs  an  cxplanation,  in  tlic  scnse  of  «s,  passcs  ovcr  by  a  natu- 
ral  transition  of  tliought  into  thc  sense  of  thc  local  adverb  uhi.  Catull.  xi. 
3  :  "  Sive  ad  extremos  pcrictrabit  Indos,  Lilus  UT  lonrje  resonante  Eoa  tundi- 

tur  unda."     Koch,  quotod  by  Ladewig. 330.  Snpcr ;  an  advcrb  ;  on  the 

surface. 332.  Titubata ;    having  bccti  viadc  to   totter ;    a  substitute   for 

tituhantia.     Translate:    did  not  keep  his  footsteps,  totterinr/  (giving  way) 

7chen.  his  feet  pressed  the  ground. Presso  SOh>  is  tlie  ablalivc  absolute 

denoting  time ;  when  oncc  his  foot  had  prcssed  this  trcacherous  spot,  as  lie 

was  rushing  along,  he  iiistantly  slipped   and   fell  headlong. ^Pronns ; 

pitching  forward. Ipsi)  rcfers  to  both  the  following  nouns. qne — 

qne  ;  hoth — and. 334.  Ille ;  in  apposition  with  thc  forcgoing  subject ;  an 

idiomatic  usage  of  the  pronoun  which  adds  animation  to  thc  languagc. 

Auiornm;  of  his  warm  affection;    i.  e.  for  Euryalus. 335.  Pcr ;  along. 

336.  Revolutns  ;  rolled  over  again  and  again. Spissa  arcna ;  on  the 

dense  arena  ;  the  languagc  applics  to  thc  arena  of  thc  Circus  propor,  rathor 

than  to  the  grassy  vallcy  where  tho  race  is  going  on. 337»  Emicat ;  as 

abovo,  319  ;  darts  forth. EuryalKS  lengthens  the  last  syllable  horc. 

338.  IMansu,  frcmita ;  ablatives  of  nianncr.     Gr.   §  24*7,  2;  Z.  §472. 

339.  Palma  ;  by  metonymy  for  victor ;  is  the  tliird  winner. 340.  Caveae 

iiigentis ;  of  the  vast  theatre ;  the  vallis  theatri  (sce  above,  288)  now  filh^d 

with  the  grcat  multitudc. 3iO,  341.  Oraprima;  the  front  seais  of  ihe 

fathcrs.     The  senators  at  Rome  occupicd  the  seats  in  front ;  so  now  thc 

noblcs  and  elders  were  scated  in  front  of  the  multitudc. 344.  Ycniens 

Virtns  ;  his  merif  prescnfing  ifself.  Diores  loudly  scconds  thc  claini  of  Eu- 
ryalus,  because  if  thc  first  prize  be  awardcd  to  Euryalus,  Ilclymus  will  re- 
ccive  the  sccond  and  Diores  himsclf  the  third ;  but  if  the  first  prizc  be 
awarded  to  Salius,  Ilclynins  will  rcceive  thc  third,  and  thus  Diorcs  will  be 

"shared  out." 3!  9.  Palmam — nemo  ;  no  onc  movcs  the  palm  from  the 

defcrmined  ordrr.     Thc  prizc  was  to  bc  given  to  the  one  who  should  come 

out  first,  with  no  othcr  condition  spe;ificd. 350.  Insoutls;  not  undcserv- 

ing. 352.  Uugnibns  aurels.    Comp.  viii.  553,  whcre  also  aurcis  is  scanned 

as  a  dissyllable. 351.  Mso;  cmphatic  substitute  for  mihi.     Comp.  ii.  7'1. 

355.  Landc  ;  mcrit ;  praiscworthy  achievcTnent;  as  i.  4G1. 35().  Si 

nie  tali$.>et;  unlcss  thc  same  unfricndlg  fortune  had  attendcd  me  as  Salius ; 
\\\  cvoWy,  had  carriedme;  Iiad  niadc  me  its  sport.  7'1'rre  is  ofton  employcd 
10  c.Nprcss  tlic  capricious  action  of  fortunc.     So  Eorbigcr  and  Ladowig  ex- 

plain  thc  verb  here. 357.  Slmul  iiis  dictis;  thc  proposition  cum  is  omit- 

ted  aftcr  simul  hcrc.     Soe  Gr.  i^  211,  K.  2;  Z.  g  321. 358.  Olli  hmits 

risit.     Comp.   i.   2o4. 359.    Didymaouls ;    some   ancicnt   artist,   whose 


BOOK    FIFTH.  479 

aame  has  beeu  lost. Artcs ;  the  plural  in  apposition  with  clypeum.     Gr. 

§  204,  R.  3. 360.  Danais ;   by  the  Greeks ;    dative  of  the  agent  after 

rejixum,  takcn  down,  unfastened.  Gr.  §  225,  ii. ;  Z.  §  419.  The  Greeks 
had  taken  the  shield  from  a  temple  of  Neptune  ;  and  perhaps  it  hadcoiiie 

into  the  hands  of  Aeneas  through   Helcnus. 361.   Hoc  aiBnc-re.     Gr. 

§249,  R.l. 

362-484.  The  piigilistic  contest  is  ncxt  dcscribcd.  Dares,  a  Trojan,  prcsents  liim- 
^lf  as  the  challenger,  but  at  first  no  one  is  disposed  to  conipete  ■with  him.  Then  an 
old  Sicilian  of  Trojan  descent,  Entelius,  is  induced  by  his  friend  Ac6stes  to  enter  the 
lists.  They  put  on  the  gauntlets  furnished  by  Aeneas,  and  commence  the  fight.  At 
first  Dares  gains  thc  advantage.  Entellus  stands  on  the  defensive,  and  merely  parrics 
or  avoids  the  blows  of  his  more  nimble  antagonist.  At  last  the  old  raan  aims  a  blow 
with  immense  efibrt  at  Dares,  who  adroitly  turns  aside,  Icaving  Entellus  to  fall  head- 
loug  by  the  very  impetua  of  his  own  motion.  Entellus  tlms  roused  by  shame  and  re- 
venge,  rises  from  the  ground,  attacks  Dares  with  fury,  and  gains  the  victory.  The 
description  is  suggested  by  Homer,  II.  xxiii.  651-699. 

362.  Dona  pcregit;  distributed  the  ■prizes ;  for  the  tense,  see  on  i.  216. 
363.  Auimns  praescns ;  a  resolute  or  prompt  spirit. S6I.  ETinctis 

palniis  ;  the  palms  being  bound ;  i.  e.  with  the  cestus.  The  cestus  was  not  a 
glove  covering  the  hand,  but  was  a  coil  of  leather  thongs,  filled  with  lead  or 
iron,  and  bound  around  the  palm  and  wrist,  and  sometimcs  extending  to 

the  elbow. 366.  VelatBai  anro  Tittisqac  ;  adorncd  with  gold  and  Jillets  ; 

i.  e.  with  gildedjillets.  These  were  bound  round  the  forehead,  and  the  ends 
hung  down  by  the  cheeks  of  the  animal.     Auro  is  refcrred  by  some  to  the 

practice  of  gilding  the  horns. 368.  Vastis  cam  Tiribns.     Gr.  §  247,  2 ;  Z. 

§  4*72. 369.  Blnrmnre.    See  on  338. 370.  Paridem;  the  post-Ho- 

meric  poets  represent  Paris  as  a  hcro  excelling  in  agility,  strength,  and  the 

use  of  weapons. 3T1.  Ad  tamolnm ;  at  the  funeral  games  in  honor  of 

Hector. Ocfnbat ;  as  in  i.  547. Qao,  in  ivhich,  denotes  situation. 

373.  Cebrycia  gcnte  ;  the  Bebrycians  were  an  ancient  tribe  of  Asia  Minor, 

on  the  Bithynian  coast  of  the  Black  Sea. Vcuicns  se  fercbat ;  who  de- 

scending,  being  a  descendant  {ycniens)  of  the  Bcbrycian  race  of  Amycus  boast- 
ed  himself;  frcely  translated,  who  exalted  himself  as  a  descendanf,  &c.  As 
in  ii.  377,  iii.  310,  the  participle  agrees  with  the  subject,  yet  virtually  modi- 

fies  the  predicate  as  if  in  the  accusative. Amyci ;  Amycus  was  a  renowncd 

boxer,  king  of  the  Bebrycians.  He  compelled  all  strangers  to  contend  with 
hira,  until  he  wtts  at  last  conquered  and  killed  by  Pollux,  who  had  landed 

with  the  other  Argonauts  in  Bithynia. 375.  Prima  ;  not  strictly  the  firsl 

battles,  but  a  substitute  for  primus,  first  presented  himself  for  the  contest. 

la  denotes  purpose,  as  in  147. 378.  Agmine,  for  multitudine. 

380.  Escedere  palma  ;  to  decline  the  contest;  to  retire  from  the  prize  of  the 

contest. 3S1.  Aeacac  ;  better  the  dative  than  the  genitive. 384.  Finis  ; 

Gr.  §  63,  (1);  comp.  ii.  554;  not  here  purpose,  but  time ;  what  will  be  the 

end  of  this  delaying  ? Usque  ;  separated  from  quo  by  tmesis. 385. 

Buc«re ;  supply  me  as  the  subject.- Ol'e  fremebant ;   applaudcd  with  a 


480  NOTES   ON    THK    AKXKIl». 

sJio^it. 38T.  Gravis,  for  ^rari/o- ;  with  (jravity  ;  ffnivclt/ ov  seriousli/. 

388.  rt  fonsedorat ;  ax  (by  chance)  hc  had  scaied  hiinxelf;  tlic  ut  is  explan- 

atory. 389.  Frnstra  ;  in  vain  thc  viost  valiant,  if,  after  all,  you  now  suffcr 

anothcr  to  carry  away  thc  prizc  while  you  are  present. 391.  Kcbis ;  a 

dativus  ethicus ;  it  inay  bc  rcndered  hcre  "of  ours;"  where  noio  is  that  god 
of  ours,  Erijx,  in  vain  hoasted  of  as  your  teacher?  in  vain  is  tlie  fanic  of  hav- 
ing  such  a  master,  siuce  you  uow  yiekl.      Thie!  ouiits  thc  comnia  after 

magister. Eryx.      Soe   on  24. 393.    Spolia  ;    prizes   v.  on    iu    ronmj- 

pugilistic  conibats. 39i.  Snb  hacc  ;  in  rephi  tothcse  things;  iinuiediateiy 

after  this. 395.  Scd  cnini ;  the  thought  is,  "  but  my  strcngth  has  Ued, 

for  my  blood  is  torpid  with  halting  old  age."    Soe  on  i.  19. 39(5.  Frisent 

viros ;  my  strength  is  paralyzed. 397.  Fncrat,  for  erat. Qna  is  gov- 

erned  by  fdcns.     Gr.  §  245,  ii.  1 ;  Z.  g  413. iniprcbus ;  braggart. 

400.  IVcc  dona  moror ;  nor  do  I  rcgard  thc  gifts. Dcinde.    Scc  abovc,  ou 

14. 402,  403.  In  proelia  fcrre  uiannni;  tocarry  his  hand  into  battle. 

Qaibns.     Forbiger  supphcs  indutus. 403.  Dnroqnc  intondcre  is  cquiva- 

lcnt  to  duro  intendens ;  binding  his  arms  with  the  ruggcd  hidc.  For  other 
exaniplos  of  this  idioin  scc  iii.  355,  paterasque  tencbant,  for  pat.  tcneutes ; 

iv.  257,  ventoscjue  secabat,  for  ventos  secan^. 406.  Longe  rccasat ;  shrinks 

farback;  so  Ladcwig  correctly  understands  tlic  words.     Souio  translate 

longe,  excecdingly  ;  others,  for  a  long  tiine. 407,  408.  Pondus — VCrsat ; 

tries  tlie  wcight  of  the  gauntlets,  and  turns  over,  this  way  and  that,  the  iiit- 
mcnse  fulds  themselves.     The  gauntlets  and  the  thongs  by  which  they  werc 

bound  are  both  included  in  vinclorum. 408.  Unc  illnc.     Z.  §  782. 

409.  Senior;  the  vcry  aged.     Comp.  abcno,  179. Pectore ;  for  the  case 

see  on  i.  12G. 410.  Cestns  et  arnia  ;  thc  gauntlets  which  were  the  arms  of 

Ilercules  ;  arma  is  added  to  cestus  to  signify  that  the  gauntlcts  werc  wcapons 

which  were  actually  used  by  him  in  pugilistic  combats. 411.  Tristeni ; 

stern  ov  fatal ;  iu  this  contcst  Hcrcules  had  slain  Eryx. 412.  Gcrmanas 

tnns;  addrc«8ed  to  Acneas,  who,  as  well  as  Eryx,  is  the  son  of  Veuus. 

413.  Sangnine,  ccrebro;  wilh  the  blood  and  brain,  of  sorae  who  had  bccn 

bcatcn  or  killed  by  Eryx. 414.    Aliidcn  ;    Ilerculcs ;    a  desccndant  of 

Alceus. Saetas  ;  supply  pugnarc,  or  soine  similar  vcrb,  SHggostcd  by  the 

forogoing   stare. 415,    416.    Aeninla — sencctns  ;     and  cnvious   old  age, 

sprinklcd  upon  my  two  temples,  was  not  yet  turning  gray;  old  agc  is  cnvious, 

bogrudges,  as  it  wcre,  my  glory,  and  so  undermincs  my  vigor. 416. 

Tcmporibas  is  the  ablat.  of  situatiou. 117.  Darcs  Troins ;  Entelhis  spoaks 

with  national  feeUng  as  a  Sicilian. 118.  Id  probably  rolatcs  to  thc  prop- 

osition  following,   tjp  takc  equal  gauntlcts. Scdet;    for  placet. Pro- 

bat;  conucct  with  thc  forcgoing  vcrb  by  and  or  whilc. Anrtor;  my  ad- 

viser.     Accstcs  had  incitod  the  old  man  to  thc  fight. 419.  Tcrga;  the 

yaunthts. 421.  Dupllcem — aniUtnm;  a^  an  old  man  quictly  scatcd,  lie 

had  wrapped  him.-olf  up  iu  a  cloak  niadc  of  coarsc  cloth  doublcd.  Such  a 
cloak  was  callcd  abolla. 422.  Laccrtosqne  connccts  wiih  thc  following 


BOOK    FIFTH.  481 

rerse  in  scanniug. 423.  Exnit;  strijjped,  divesfcd ;  vestibm  beiug  undei 

uood. 426.  ladigitos;  join  with  arrcctus ;  Hftiiig  himself  on  his  toes. 

■ 427.  Interritns;  dauntless. 431.  Mesabris  et  mole ;  in  his  limbs  and 

his  heavy  frame. Tarda ;  unwilHng. 432.  Genaa ',  liere  in  two  sylla- 

hX&s^,  gen-wa. 431,432.  Treaieati  labaat;  may  be  rendered  tremble  and 

totter. Aeger  anlielitas ;  a  difficult  panting  ;  a  hard  drawing  of  the  breath 

that  betrays  infirmity. 433.  Vulnera;  by  maioxijmy  iov  verbera ;  blo.ws 

causing  wounds. 434.    Ingeaiiaant;    multiply ;    redoxMe. 434,  435. 

Peetore — sonitns;   emit  deep  sounds  from  the  chest. 437.   Stat  gravis; 

siands  heavy. Slsa  eodeai ;  in  the  same  position.     .N^isus  is  rt  fnn  pos!- 

tion  ;  a  bracing  of  the  feet,  as  it  were,  upon  the  ground  so  as  to  resist  an 

attaclv  and  apply  one's  strength  with  tlie  greater  effect.     Comp.  iii.  37. 

438.  Tela  modo  cxit ;  and  merely  shuns  bloics.     For  tlie  acc.  after  exit.  see 

Gr.  §  233,  3,  note. Ille  refers  to  Darcs. 439.  Molibas ;  with  engines. 

440.  Snb  armis ;  in  anns.     Dares  at  one  moraent  is  active  in  his  mo- 

tions,  lilie  those  who  press  the  assault  of  the  city  witli  engines,  then  hc 
pauses  to  watch  his  antagonist,  and  seeli  some  unguardcd  movement,  like 
the  bloclvading  army  encamped  about  the  fortrcss,  and  for  a  time  inactive. 

444.  A  vertice ;  for  dcsuper;  as  i.  114. 446.  Ultro;  of  his  own  im- 

pulse  ;  not  because  struck  or  impelled  by  somc  external  force.     Some  un- 

derstand  beyond,  or  contrary  to,  expectation. 447.  Gravis  graviterqnc ; 

a  Homeric  idiom.     1\.  xvi.  776,  fieyas  fxeyaXuia-Ti. 448.  Qnoadam ;  sonie- 

times. ErymantiiO  ;  Erymanthus ;  a  mountain  of  Arcadia,  whcre  Hercu- 

les  liilled  the  wild  boar. 449.  Ida.    See  on  ii.  696. 4.50.  Stndiis  ;  with 

earnest  sympathies. 451.  Coclo  ;  for  ad  coelum.     See  on  i.  6  ;  also  comp. 

Madvig,  §  251. 455.  Tnni;  at  the  same  time ;  moreover.     Comp.  i.  164. 

Conscia  virtns ;  the  consciousncss  of  valor ;  valor  Ivnown  to  itself  and 

confident  in  itself. 456.  Daren;  also  Dareta,  460;  for  the  two  forms  of 

the  acc.  see  Gr.  §  80,  i.  and  iv. ;  Z.  §  71,  2. 456.  Aeqnore;  the  surface 

of  the  ground;  the  phxin. 457.  lile.     See  on  334. 458.  Qnam;  as. 

459.  Cnlminibns ;  on  the  house-tops. 459, 460.  Densis  ictibns  creber ; 

frequent  with  thick  following  blows ;  for  crebris  ictibus. 460»  Vcrsat ; 

beats  hitn  round  and  round ;  as  agit  toto  aeguore,  above,  456. 466.  Vires 

alias;  superhuman  strength ;  do  you  not  perceive  that  his  strength  is  otfier 
(than  mortal)?     Some  god  helps  him.     Others  translate  the  passage,  that 

thy  strength  is  other  than  thou,  didst  suppose. Coaversa  nnmina ;  that  the 

divinities  are  changed ;  when  Entellus  fell,  the  gods  seenied  to  be  on  the 
side  of  Dares,  but  now  it  is  plain  they  have  bcconie  propiiious  to  his  an- 
tagonist ;  and  he  need  not  feel  disgraced  to  submit  to  their  suporior  power. 

He  is  not  wantiug  iu  prowess,  but  is  only  infelix. 467.  Dixitqne — et 

direniit ;  que — et,  {both — and,)  Wagner  says,  may  connect  two  ideas,  when 

the  latter  follows  the  former  immediately. 468.  Fidi  aequales;  hisfaith- 

fid  friends ;  aequalcs  means  of  the  same  age. 469.  Ctroqnc ;  to  either 

sidc.     Forbigcr  quotes  the  original  of  this  verse  from  Hom.  II.  xxiii.  6'J7 

21 


482 


NOTES    ON    TIIE    AENEID. 


sqq.  :     aii.i.a  Traxii   ■nrvovra,    Kap-t)   ^aWovb'   irfpciXTf. 471.     \0CHtij    heing 

summoned;  thcse  fricnds  represent  Darcs,  whcn  the  competifors  are  callcd 

togctlicr.     Comp.  21-1,  cunctis  ex  more  vocatis. 473.  Ilic;  of  tinic. 

Snperans;  triwnphing  in  spirit. 476.    Qna  mortc;    from  what  certiiin 

and  cruci  dcath. BcTocatnm ;   rescucd. 477.    Advcrsi — jnvcnci ;    he 

stood  in  front  of  the   bullock  facing  him. 478.  Dounui — pugnae  ;  as  the 

prize  of  the  comhat. 479.  Libravit;  and  liaving  drawn  hack  his  rir/ht 

hand,  stretching  himself  to  the  v.tmost  height,  he  aimed  the  gauntlct  right  he- 
tivecn  the  fior^is,  and  crushed  the  fractured  slcidl  and  hrain ;  htcrally,  the 

hrain   having  heen  hroken  out. 481.    Exnnimisqae  ;    que   connects  the 

verbs;  he  is  throicn  doivn,  and  qnivering  lies. Hnmi.     See   on  i.  193. 

Observe  the  monosyllable  closing  the  verse.     See  Gr.  §  310,  II.  2 ;  Z.  g  845  ; 

comp.  i.  105. 482.  Snper;    standivg  over ;    or,  with  otliers,  moreover. 

483.  Meliorem  anim.tm ;  Dares  Avould  have  been  slain  as  a  victini  to 

Eryx ;  but  the  life  of  the  bull  is  given  as  a  more  acceptable  sacrifice.  Eryx 
was  the  master  of  Entellus,  aud  has  just  now,  as  a  god,  secured  him  thc 
victory.  Ilence  the  buU  is  ofifered  to  Eryx,  to  whom  (perhaps)  he  now 
dcdicates  his  arms,  in  i-etiring  forever  from  pugilistic  combats.  For  it  was 
the  custom  for  rctired  gladiators  and  soUlicrs  to  hang  up  tlieir  arms  to  thcir 

patron  gods  in  sonie  temple. 484.  Persolvo  dcnotes  full  paymcnt  of  a 

debt ;  hcre  thc  sense  is  sacrifice  in  fulfilment  of  vows  to  Eryx. 

485-544.  The  trinl  of  skill  in  archery.  There  are  four  compctitors  :  Hippocoon, 
Mnestheus,  Eurytion,  AccBtes.  Their  order  is  dctermined  by  lot.  Tho  mark  ia  a 
dove  fastened  by  a  cord  to  a  ship's  mast,  erected  for  the  purpose  on  thc  plain.  TIio 
arrow  of  Hippocoon  strikes  the  mast,  but  misses  the  bird.  Muesthcus  hits  the  string 
only,  and  the  bird  escapes.  Eurytion  kills  her  on  tho  wing.  Accstcs  discharges  liis 
arrow  into  the  air  at  random.  The  arrow  takcs  fire  and  disappcars  in  the  eky.  In 
consequence  of  this  miracle  the  old  man  is  pronounced  victor.  Tho  contest  is  suggest- 
ed  bj-  Hom.  II.  xxiii.  850-873. 

486.  Qni  fortc  vellnt ;  such  as  may  ivish  bi/ 

chancc. 487.  Ingcuti  maan  ;   with  jwirerfid 

hand ;   the  Ilomcric  x^'?'  ■""nx^''??  O''  cm^apij. 

Sce  on  7nanii,  241. 488.  Trajcfto  In  fnuc ; 

bg  a  rope  passed  throngh  (the  mast) ;  or  clse,  as 
some  understand,  attachcd  to  the  hird ;  Lade- 
wig :  in  the  noose  (or  knot)  of  the  cord.  The 
upper  part  of  the  mast  was  alrcady  pierccd 

with  holes. 492.  Locns  ;  the  place  ;  for  thc 

lot  which  dccided  the  jdace  or  order. Ilyr- 

tacidac ;  Ilippocoon  and  Nisus  (i.x.  177)  are 
both  callcd  sons  of  Ilyrtacus.  llomer  also 
mcntions  (11.  ii.  837)  Asins,  as  onc  of  his  sons. 

:;  Hyrtacus  was  a  Trojan  princc. 493.  Modo  ; 

Am;izi)ii,  Thrygian.  just  now,  or  latclij.     Mncstlicus  had  bccn  scc- 

ond  of  tho  tlirce  victors  in  the  ship  race,  and  tlicrcforc  has  still  the  olive 


ROOK    FIFTH.  483 

«rreath  on  his  head.  Eurytion,  like  Hippocoon,  is  uot  elsewhere  nieutioned. 
His  brother  Pandarus  was  famed  for  archery,  and  uuder  the  directiou  of 
Minerva  (^jussus)  had  brolien  off  the  truce  with  the  Greeks,  by  discharglng 

an  arrow  at  Menelaus.     Hom.  II.  ii.,  iv.   88  sq. 4!I8.  icestes ;  for  the 

name  or  loi  of  Acestes. 499t    Ansns  Ct  ipsc ;    eaen  he  havincf  dared; 

though  aged. 501.  Pro  se  qa!S<5ue',  each  one  with  all  his  power ;  for  the 

construction,  see  Gr.  §  209,  note  8 ;  Z.  §  367. 502.   IVcrvo  stridcntc ; 

ablat.  absol. -504.  Mali,  masc. ;    malus,  a  tree,  is  fem. 505.  TiniGit 

exterrita  pennis  ;  bei^icf  frir/hfened,  Jluttered  with  its  wings ;  thc  frightened 

bird  showed  its  fear  {timuit)  by  fluttering  with  its  wings. 506.  lugenti 

sonaernnt  omnia  plaosn ;  the  whole  space  resowided  wilh  thc  loud  clapping 
(of  her  wings);  in  215,  the  noise  of  a  bird's  wings  is  described  in  similar 
terms.  The  language  can  hardly  refer  to  applause  given  by  the  spectators, 
as  this  was  not  the  degree  of  success  which  would  call  for  it,  and  noue  is 

mentioned  as  given  for  more  lucky  marksmen  afterwards. 50T.  Addacto 

arcn ;  his  bow  being  drawn  ;  i.  e.  so  that  the  head  of  the  arrow  comes  to  the 

bow;  so  in  ix.  632,  adducta  sagitta, 508.  Tetcndit ;   directed. 511. 

Inncxa  pedcin  ;  fastened  by  the  foot.     For  the  acc.  see  on  i.  228. 512» 

Notos  is  governed  by  the  preposition  in  ;  for  a  similar  displacement  of  the 

prep.  see  ii.  654;  also  for  the  similar  omission  of  nec,  see  i.  544. 513. 

Bapidns;    swift,   srviftly. ^Arca   contcnta  parato  ;   strained  on  the  ready 

bow. 514.  Tela ;  for  the  singular;  his  shaft.     The  arrow  is  said  to  be 

strained  as  well  as  the  bow.     See  above,  on  507. — ■ — Fratrem.     Eurytion 

invoked  the  ald  of  Pandarus,  as  EntcIIus  (483)  that  of  Eryx. 517,  518. 

Bcliqoit  in  astris  aetheriis ;  left  her  life  among  the  ethereal  stars ;  for  in 
aethere,  in  the  sky.     Why  the  stars  should  be  called  ethereal  is  explained 

in  note  on  i.  608. 521.  Ostcntans ;  the  distant  flight  of  the  arrow,  and 

the  noise  of  the  bow,  would  show  the  strength  and  skill  of  old  Acestes. 

522,  523.  Snbitum  magnoque  fntttrum  angurio  monstrnm ;  «  jyrodigy,  sudden, 
and  destined  to  prove  of  great  porte^it.  TJie  great  residt  sitbseque^itly  ex- 
plained  it,  and  the  dread  soothsayers  interpreted  the  omens  too  late.  Had 
Virgil  revised  the  poem  he  might  perhaps  have  elaborated  this  passage,.and 
saved  his  commentators  much  perplexity.  Did  he  intend  at  this  particular 
point  to  foreshadow,  by  the  burning  of  an  arrow  in  the  air,  that  Aeneap 
should  be  engaged  in  war  in  Italy  ?  Did  he  wish  to  foreshadow  the  war  of 
the  Romans  against  the  Carthagiuians  and  Sicilians  ?  It  is  difficult  to  see 
what  motive  Virgil  could  have  had  for  introducing  at  this  point  an  omen 
referring  to  either  of  these  events.  In  regard  to  the  latter,  how  could 
soothsayers  in  the  time  of  the  Punic  wars  be  supposed  to  know  any  thing 
about  an  arrow  which  chanced  to  be  shot  by  Acestes  nine  hundred  years 
before?  On  the  whole  it  seems  most  probable  that  the  omen  is  connectcd 
in  Virgirs  mind  with  the  burning  of  the  ships,  described  below,  659  sq. 

523.  Exitns  ingens  is  thought  by  some  too  grave  a  term  to  apply  merely  to 
ihe  burning  of  the  ships.     But  if  ingens  may  describe  the  clapping  of  a 


484  NOTES   ON    THE    AENEID. 

dove's  winf;s,  sun-ly  the  sctting  of  a  wliole  fleet  on  firc,  and  the  loss  of  four 
ehip.«,  all  through  thc  agency  of  two  goddcsses,  may  bc  called  inf/ens  ixitus. 
Thc  praycr  of  Acncas  below,  CS5-C91,  would  indicatc  that  thc  conflagration 
was  a  niatter  of  such  nioincnt  as  to  call  for  the  intcrposition  of  Jupiter ;  and 
ingentcs  cnrae,  mighty  anxicties,  overwhelmcd  Aeneas  in  consequence  of 
losiiig  tlicse  four  ships;  therefore  thc  accident  may  well  be  callcd  ingetis. 
The  agcd  Nautes,  a  prophct,  then  advised  (see  704)  what  should  bc  done. 
Ile  niay  be  one  of  the  vates  who,  too  late,  that  is,  after  the  burning  of  the 
sliip>^,  cxpluined  the  omen;  i.  e.  eaw  what  tlie  burning  arrow  i)ortendcd. 

525.  Arnndo ;  the  shaft  was  made  of  recd. 527.  Reflxa ;  looscned. 

Coinp.  thc  dcscription  of  the  meteor,  ii.  C93. 530-532.  Ncc  maximiis, 

ctc. ;  Acncas  rcgards  the  prodigy  as  a  tokcn  of  divine  favor  towards  Aces- 
tcs,  and  laetum  indieates  thc  same  understanding  of  it  on  thc  part  of  Accstes 

himself. 533,  534.  Voluit  auspieiis ;  has  made  knoivn  hls  will  by  such  to- 

kens. 534.  Exsortem  ;  out  of  thc  fixed  order ;  not  provided  for  among 

the  premiums  first  proposcd ;  an  honor  to  wliich  you  wcre  not  entitled  by 

the  coiiditions  fiist  laid  down. 536.  Impressnm  ;  cngraved. 537.  Cb- 

sens ;  the  father  of  Hccuba,  thc  wife  of  l'i  iain. 538.  Ferre,  for  ferren- 

dum.     See  on  i.  819. Sni  mounmeutnm;  as  a  tncmento  of  himself. 

541.  PraelatO  Itonori ;  nor  does  ihe  nolle  Euriition  envy  tlic  honor  put  be- 
fore  his  ov:n.  lle  is  not  displeased  that  an  extraordinary  gift,  not  included 
among  the  proposcd  prizes,  and  cchpsing  thc  first  prize,  should  be  prescnted 
to  Accstes.  Some  understand  praelato  to  rcfcr  to  Accstcs,  tliough  gram- 
matically  agrceing  with  honori ;  \.  c.  Accstcs  placcd  bcfore  (Eurytion)  in 
honor,  and  rewardcd  lotth  the  first  prize,  to  which  Eurytion  was  cntitled. 

543.  Ingreditnr  douis;  he  advanees  (honored)  with  prizes ;  the  words 

scem  to  be  cquivalont  to  donatus  est.    For  the  abl.  see  Gr.  §  250. 

545-603.  The  cavalry  exercise  of  Aacanlus  au(Uils  young  companions.  Threo  lead- 
ers,  Priamus,  Atys,  aud  Ascauius,  commaiid  cach  a  troop  of  twelve  boys.  They  en- 
gnge  in  coinplicated  evolutions,  compared  by  tlie  poel  to  thc  Labyrinth  of  Daedalus, 
and  are  iiearly  through  with  tho  exercise,  when  they  are  Buddenly  interruptod  by  Iho 
ucwBtliiit  tlie  Bbips  are  on  fire. 

The  martial  gaine  of  tho  boys,  hero  described,  was  called  Troja,  and  was  practised 
by  tlie  Romans,  especially  in  tho  time  of  Virgil,  under  '.he  patronage  of  Augustus. 

515.  Nondnm  ccrtaminc  misso ;  hr  ludis  nondum  missis ;  the  games  not 
yet  bcing  coiiiji/clcd.     Otliors  refer  ccrtamine  to  the  coutcst  of  archery  alone ; 

as  if  Kjiylides  liad  bcen  called  cven  bcforc  tlie  arcliers  wcrc  dismisscd. 

54U.  Castodem ;  noblo  youtlis,  both  ia  the  heroic  agc  and  in  Virgil'8  timc, 

were  attciided  by  guardians.     Comp.  257,  and  Ilom.  II.  xvii.  323. 550» 

Dncat,  ostcudat ;  subjunctivc  aftcr  dic.     Sec  (!r.  §  202,  R.  4;  Z   §  615. 

Avo;/or,   in  hunor  of,  his  grandfalher. 551.  IpsC  ;  Acneas. Clrco  } 

froiii    the    long   exlcndcd   arena. 552.    lufusnui ;    thc    inultitude    "  had 

pourcd"  ovcr  the  level  ground  during  the  trial  iu  archery.  Thcy  are  now 
directed  to  rctiro  so  as  to  leave  thc  spacious  circus,  or  vallcm  thcatri,  cloar 


BOOK   FIFTH.  485 

for  the  horsemen. 553.  Pariter;  equally,  or  similarly  adoined.     Some 

understand  "  side  by  side." 554.  Lncent ;  they  shine  in  polished  armor, 

and  with  their  glittering  wcapons,  and  golden  ornaments. Eantes ;  as 

they  advance. 554,  555.  QliOS  mirata;  not  qicos  fremit;  admiring  whom 

all  the  youth  of  Sicily  aiul  Troy  applaiid.    Corap.  quam  secutae  glomerantur, 

i.  499,  500. 555.  Fremit  denotes  the  noise  of  their  acclamations,  as  fre- 

munt,  iv.  14G.     It  may  take  the  accusative  of  a  thing,  as  vii.  460,  but  not 

of  a  person. 556.  In  morcm,  for  dc  or  e.x  more  ;  according  to  the  custom 

of  boys  in  this  game.  The  hair  of  all  was  hound  with  a  well-trimmed  croivn-. 
The  crown  was  of  olive  leaves,  and  we  learn  from  vii.  '751,  and  also  from 
line  673,  below,  that  it  was  fastened  round  the  helmet.  Thus  the  worda 
coma  pressa  are  used  with'  some  freedom  ;  but  that  they  should  be  so  used 
is  more  conccivable  than  Dr.  Henry^s  explanation,  namely,  that  the  trimmed 
crown  here  spoken  of  is  only  the  hair  itself,  so  worn  as  to  appear  like  a 

crown  round  the  edge  of  the  helmet. 557.  Bina  hastilia ;  Servius  says 

that  Augustus  presented  to  the  boys  at  the  Trojan  games  two  spears  each. 

558.  Pectore;  an  ablat.  of  situation  ;  a  fexible  collar  of  twisfed  gold  (a 

torques)  goes  round  the  neck,  (descending)  on  the  breast.     It  is  "  at  the  top 

of  the  breast"  tbat  the  euds  come  together  and  hang  down. 560.  Na- 

mcro ;  join  with  tres. Terni ;  for  the  cardinal,  tres. Vagantnr  ;  move 

abouf. 561.  Bis  seni:  there  are  twelve  boys  in  each  division,  besides  the 

leader.  The  idea  of  dividing  them  into  thrce  companies  is  supposed  by 
some  to  be  suggested  by  the  original  division  of  the  Romau  knights  into 

three  centuries. 562.  Agmine  partito  ;  mi  separafe  companies ;  literally, 

ablat.  absol.,   the  (whole)  band  being  divided. Paribus  magistris;  with 

guides  similarly  armed;  hteraUy,  ablat.  absol.,  their  masters  (being)  equal. 
Heyne  refers  magistris  here  to  the  guardians  or  masters  of  the  boys,  such 
as  are  mentioned  in  546  and  669.  Some  of  them  might  bo  acting  now  as 
riding  masters.     But  the  words  are  sometimcs  and,  perhaps,  better  under- 

stood  of  the  young  commanders  themselves,  as  magistri  equitum. 563. 

Tna  acies ;  supply  est.     One  band  of  the  youth  is  that  which,  &c. 564. 

Cefcrens;  bearing  again ;  bringing  back ;  and  so  reminding  the  Trojans  of 
Priam.     It  was  customary  for  the  grandson  to  receive  the  name  of  his 

grandsire.     The  death  of  Polites  is  described  in  ii.  526. 565.  Anctnra 

Italos;  destined  to  multiply  the  Italians ;  for  Cato  says  that  the  people  of 
Politorium  or  Pohdorium,  an  Italiau  city,  were  the  descendants  of  Polites ; 
but  he  makes  Polites  himself,  instead  of  his  son  Priamus,  the  founder  of  the 
city ;  thus  rejecting  the  tradition  that  Polites  was  slain  at  the  sack  of  Troy. 

Qnem  ;  whom  a  Tliracian  horse  bears  dappled  with  whifc  spots,  showing 

white  fore-feef,  a»J  (Ufting)  high  his  wJute  foreliead.^ — Yestigia  pedis;  foot- 

steps;  periphrasis  here  for  j5e.9. 56T.  Ardnns  has  reference  to  the  hcad 

alonc. 568.  Atys  ;  the  second  leader  is  caUed  Atys  out  of  complimeut  to 

the  maternal  lineage  of  Augustus,  whose  mother  belonged  to  the  Atian  gens, 
»3  she  was  the  daughter  of  M.  Atius  Balbus,  by  Julia,  thc  sister  of  Juliua 


486  NOTES   ON    THE    AENEID. 

Caesar. 569t  Pncro  pncr ;  the  arrangcment  of  the  words  as  in  i.  684. 

Somc  fancy  that  the  poet  meant  to  indicate  here  thc  intimate  connection  of 
the  Julian  and  Atian  families,  or  (/entes,  both  of  which  are  representcd  in 

the  person  of  Augustus. lalo.      Comp.  iv.   31,  sorori. 5T2.    Esse; 

Greclc  construction  for  ut,  or  gui,  esset.     Comp.  538;  Madvig,  419. 5T5. 

Mansa  ;  join  with  excipiunt. Pavidos  ;  trcmbling.     Scrvius  understands 

this  of  their  eager,  trembling   desire  for  glorv ;  but  Ileyue  tliinks  it  may 

rcfcr  to  tlieir  uatural  boyish  timidity  and  modcsty. 576.  Vctcrnni ;  here 

for  actate  provectorum ;  advaiiccd  in  years,  veneraUe. 578.  Lnstravcrc  ; 

jjassed  in  review  ;  they  rode  along  in  front  of  the  whole  asscnibly. Para- 

tis ;  to  them  {noii')  readi/ ;  i.  e.  aftcr  completing  the  review.     The  dative 

liniits  dedit. 579.   Longe  ;  from  afar. 580.   Parcs  ;   Thicl   explains 

correctly  as  equivalent  hcre  to  pariter  in  68*7  ;  side  by  side ;  i.  e.  prcserving 

iheir  order  ;  which  is  here  three  abreast. Agniiaa  ;  column ;  their  whole 

body. ^Terni;   three  by  three  ;   ihree  abreast. 581.   Dcdnctis  clioris; 

their  squadrojis  beiiig  drawn  off ;  meaning  tlicir  three  divisions  of  twclve 

each. Vocati ;  bcing  summoned  ;  they  wheel  aud  charge  at  a  signal  given 

by  Epytidcs.  The  boys  have  rode  in  rcview  before  the  assembly,  in  ihree 
squadrons,  marchiiig  ouc  after  the  other,  each  squadron  hcadcd  by  its  own 
commander,  and  each  arrangcd  iii  r-anks  of  thrce ;  tliat  is,  marching  thrce 
by  thrcc.  At  the  given  signal  the  Sfiuadrons  scparatc,  still  prcscrving  their 
ranks,  three  abreast,  and  withdrawing  rapidly  undcr  thcir  sevcral  Icaders  to 
thcir  proper  positions.  Thcn  at  anothcr  signal  they  commeuce  ilie  cavalry 
aciion,  two  squadrons  manceuvring  as  allies,  against  the  third.  Thus  there 
is  opportunity  for  the  most  complicated  cavalry  movements.  In  accordance 
with  this  view  of  the  passage  the  translation  will  be  as  follows :  they  gal- 
lopcd  apart  (from  each  other)  in  equal  ranks,  (pares,)  and  (thus)  broke  up 
the  columns,  by  drawing  off  their  troops,  (choris,)  (riding)  three  by  thrcc  ;  ana 
again,  when  summojied,  thcy  whecled  (convcrterc  vias)  and  chargcd  with  hostile 
weapons.     The  second  clausc,  agmina  solvcre,  is  an  cpcxcgesis,  cxplanatory 

of  thc  first. 58 li  Advcrsis  spatiis;   in  2'laces  ovcr  against  cach  other ; 

raoving  in  opposite  directions,  now  rctrcating,  aud  now  advancing  front  to 
front.  Translate  the  pass.age  thus :  Thcn  thcy  enter  itpon  succcssivc  advancct 
and  relrcals,  in  opposite  dircctions,  and  intcrscct  circlcs  wtih  circles  one  after 

anolher,  and,  as  armed  men,  thcy  prcscvt  an  iniage  of  battlc. 585.  Snb 

armis ;  for  armati.     Comp.  440. 580»  Tcrga  nndant ;  expose  iheir  backa 

inflight. 587.  Facta  paritcr  nnnc  pacc  fcrnntnr ;  having  made  pcace  ihey 

ride  sidc  by  side ;  in  a  unitcd  colunin  ;  just  as  iu  the  opening  review.  Tho 
complicated  curves  dcscribcd  in  thcsc  cquestrian  cxercises  are  compared  to 

the  Crctan  Labyrinth. 588.  Aita  ;  scc  on  i.  C80 ;  thc  word  may  refcr, 

howcver,  to  thc  niountains  on  thc  island. 589.  Parlctibns  is  scanncd  as 

four  .«yllablcs,  jmr-ycl-i-bus.     Sec  on  ii.  10.     It  is  thc  ablativc  of  manner. 

Tcxtnni ;  wrovght ;  the  word  is  choscn  with  rcfcrcnce  to  the  wcb-like 

Brrangenient  of  thc  passagcs. Cacds ;  ohscurc ;  bccause  witliout  light. 


BOOK    FIFTH.  487 

589j  590i  Aneipitem  dolam,  etc. ;  a  treacherous  winding  (rendered)  nn 

certain  by  a  tkousand pathwai/s,  where  the  nntraced  and  inextricablc  maze  ren 

dered  all  guidinr/  marks  deceptive. 592.  Hand  alio  enrsn  ;  by  no  differcni 

course ;  uith  like  (devious)  course,  do  the  S07is  of  the  Trojans  intersect  (cacli 
other''^)  footstcps,  and  interweave  in  sport  their  retreats  and  hostile  chargcs. 

591.  Delphianm.    Gr.  §  222,  R.  2 ;  Z.  §  411. 595.  Carpatliinm ;  the 

Carpatbian  sea  was  so  uaraed  from  the  island  of  Carpathus,  lying  betv/een 
Rhodes  and  Crete.     The  dolphins  pass  swiftly  to  and  fro  between  the  Car- 

pathian  and  Libyan  scas. 597.  Albam.     See  i.  271. 598.  Retnlit;  re- 

vived,  renewed. 599.  Quo  modo ;  after  the  manner  in  ivhich  he  Jdmselj, 

in  which  the  Trojan  boys  with  him,  celebrated  them. 600.  Snos;  tJLcir 

children,  ov  posterity. Dinc;  of  place. Porro;  in  course  ;  in  process 

of  time. 601.  Patrinm  Iionorem;  the  ancestral  honor ;  the  sacred  garae 

in  honor  of  Anchises,  handed  down  by  the  anccstors  of  Rome. 602. 

Troja ;  and  now  (the  ganie)  is  called  Troy,  the  boys  the  Trojan  band.—— 
Dicitnr  agrees  with  the  predicate  nominative.  See  Gr.  §  209,  R.  9 ;  Z. 
§  369.     The  sham  fight  called  Troja  wus  one  of  the  gamcs  of  thc  circus  at 

Rorae.     See  Smith's  Dict.  Antiq.,  Circus. 603.  Hac — tenns  are  separatcd 

by  tmesis. Sancto  patrl;  to  tlce  divine  falher  ;  the  deified  Anchises. 

604-699.  The  conflagration  of  tlie  ships  'WhilQ  the  games  are  in  progress,  Juno 
senda  Iris  down  to  excite  discontent  among  the  Trojan  women,  who  are  aasembled 
near  the  shore,  aud  not  witnessing  the  games,  hut  gazing  mournfully  on  the  sea,  while 
they  bemoan  the  death  of  Ancliises.  While  they  are  grieving  that  so  muoh  of  the  sea 
is  still  to  be  crossed,  and  that  they  cannot  put  an  end  to  their  hardships  by  settling  in 
Sicily,  Iris  preseiits  herself  in  the  form  of  Beroe,  a  Trojan  matron,  and  gives  utterancc 
to  the  feelings  wliich  flll  them  all.  They  are  roused  to  fury,  and,  seizing  fire-brands 
from  the  altars  of  Neptune,  on  which  eacriflces  are  burning  near  the  water,  they  hurl 
them  into  the  ships.  Presently  the  alarm  is  conveyed  by  Eumelus  to  the  Trojan  as- 
eembly  at  the  tomb  of  Anchises.  Ascanius,  having  ecarcely  completed  the  cavalry 
exercise,  hastens  on  his  horse,  followed  by  Aeneas  and  the  rest,  to  extinguish  tho  fire. 
But  it  has  already  penotrated  into  the  holds  of  the  ships,  and  all  human  eflbrts  are 
unavailing.  Aeueas  then  calls  upon  Jupiter,  who  answers  his  prayer  by  sending  down 
a  flood  of  rain,  and  preserving  all  the  ships,  save  four. 

604.  Hic  primnm  ;  nowfirst;  for  up  to  this  moment  the  games  had  been 

going  forward  without  any  untoward  accident. Dlntata  nOTavlt  ;  a  poetic 

expression  for  mutavit ;  so  Heyne  correctly  explains  it :  capricious  Fortune 
broke  herfaith.  Hcr  favor  thus  far  had  been  a,  pledge  or  promise  of  contin- 
ued  favor  throughout  the  day,  which  she  now  violates,  by  suddenly  bringing 
evil.     To  change  herself  or  her  aspect,  and  make  new  faith,  is  to  be  treach- 

erotis,  perfda. 605.  Tnmnlo ;  the  dat.  as  in  avo,  550 ;  «i  honor  of  the 

tomb. 608.  Irim.     Gr.  §  80,  1,  exc.  2;  Z.  §  71. 60T.  Ventos  adsplrat 

ennti ;  as  ske  goes  aids  her  with  the  winds.     Comp.  iv.  223. 608.  Anti- 

qnnm  satnrata  dclorem ;  and  not  yet  having  glutted  her  long  cherished  re- 
venge.     Corap.  i.  25.     For  the  acc.  dolorem,  see  on  i.  228;  also  comp.  Mad- 

dg,   §  237,  b. 609.  Illa ;  Iris. Coloribns;  ablat.  dcscribing  arcutu. 

610.  Nnlli.     Scc  on  i.  326. Cito  framitc ;  in  a  swift  pathway, 


488 


NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 


Virgo  is  in  apposit ion  with  Ula ;  she  the  virgin. 611.  Concnrsnm  ;  th« 

asscmblage  at  the  tomb. C12.  ReUetam ;  lcft  by  the  mcn. 613.  Se- 

fretae;  apart ;  scparatcd  fiom  the  assembly  which  was  engaged  in  the 
games;  for  the  ancicnt  custom  did  not  suficr  women  to  attend  public  spcc- 

taclcs. Sola  acta  ;  ow  the  lonely  strand;  londy  bccause  all  the  Trojan 

mcn  were  abseut. Troades  ;  from  Troas ;  a  Trojan  woman. 615.  616. 

Ileu— marls;  alas,  that  so  many  wafcrs,  ihat  so  much  o/  the  sea  rcmains  for 

Ihe  weary  royacjers!    For  the  infinitivc,  see  on  i.  37,  desistere. 618.  Me- 

dias;  as  medios,  i.  440. 620.  Tmarll;  o/  Tmaros,  a  hill  in  Epirus. - 

Keroo,  according  to  646,  was  a  llhoetclan,  that  is,  a  Trojan.  Those  who 
wish  to  hold  the  poet  to  historical  prccision  must  imagine  a  marriage  be- 
tween  the  aged  dame  and  Doryclus  while  Aeneas  was  on  his  vi.sit  to  Helenus ; 
thus  affording  the  Epirote  an  inducement  to  emigratc ;  or  else  we  must  re- 
solve  the  difficulty  by  substituting  some  othcr  word,  perhaps  Ismarii,  for 
Tmarii ;  which  would  make  the  husband  a  Thracian  instcad  of  an  Epirotc. 

621.  Cui;  as  one  to  whom.     See  Gr.  §  264,  8 ;  Z.  §  564.     Aa  Dorychis 

had  been  a  person  of  high  dcsccnt,  thcrefore  his  wife  would  now  have  influ- 
cnce ;  and  for  this  rcason,  as  well  as  because  she  was  disabled  by  sicknesa 
from  bcing  present  with  the  rest,  Iris  assumcs  her  form.     Some  good  au- 

thorities  rcfcr  cui  to  Beroe  rather  than  to  Doryclus. 622.  Dardanidum  ; 

genit.  as  i.  565. Matribns  ;  dative  after  in/ert.     Comp.  xi.  36. 623. 

0  miserae.     The  same  scntiment  as  in  i.  94,  iii.  321. Achalca ;  like  Ar<'i- 

va,  ii.  254,  a  specific  for  the  general  term,  Graeca. 624.  Traxerit  •  for 

the  mode,  sec  on  cui,  621,  and  comp.  i.  388. 626.  Septlma ;  this  scems 

inconsistent  with  the  statement  in  i.  755.  Forbiger  quotes  Gorsrau's  cx- 
planation ;  the  seventh  summer  commenccd  with  the  dcparture  of  the  Tro- 
jans  from  Sicily,  and  their  speedy  arrival  in  Carthagc.  This  same  summer 
(as  Virgil  cmploys  acstas)  is  not  yet  over;  that  is,  wintcr  h.is  not  yct  sct  iii. 

Vertltnr;  ia  closiny ;  finishing  its  revoliition.     Comp.  iii.  284. 627. 

Qnnm ;  since  traversing  the  watcrs,  siitce  travcrsing  all  lands,  (encountcring) 
80  many  perilous  rocks  and  vicissitiules  o/  the  weathcr,  we  havc  been  icandering 
while  we  purstie  over  the  great  dcep  the  cver-recediug  Italy.  Comp.  iii.  490. 
Quum  is  sometimes  joined  with  the  present  indicative,  to  denote  that  an 
action  has  becn  going  on,  and  is  still  continuing.     ArnoId's  Lat.  Prose,  488 

d,(l)- 628.  Emensae  ;  an  instance  of  the  zeugma. 630.  Fr.iternl  •  the 

country  is  called //-a^crHa;,  as  in  24,  on  account  of  the  rclationship  betwecn 

Acneas  and  Eryx. 631.    Jaeere ;    instcad  oi  quominus  jaciamus.     Gr. 

§  262,  R.  11,  n.      What  prcvcnts  iis /rom  /ounding  tralls?     Jarcre,  ponere, 

txtrncre,  muros,  or  /undamcnta. ClvibDS  ;    to  our  conntrymen. 632! 

Neqnldqnam;  snatched /rom  amidst  thc  cncmy  in  vain  ;  for  we  have  failcd 

to  secure  for  them  a  new  abode. 633.  Nnllane  jam  ;  shall  no  walls  »ow 

any  more  be  callcd  the  walls  o/  Troy  ?  that  is,  ure  we  now  at  lcngth  to  give 
up  all  hope?  Thc  particlc  jam  has  the  force  of  now  (at  lcnglh)  uo  more. 
Uomp.  194  ;  i.  550,  iii.  260.     ShaU  1  nowhcrc  sce  the  Jlectorcan  rivcrs,  Aan 


BOOK    FIFTH.  489 

thus  and  Simols  ?  Hedorean  is  a  more  stirring  word  than  Trojan,  because 
Hector  is  dear  to  them,  and  his  heroic  deeds  are  associated  with  these  two 
rivers.  Comp.  190.  They  had  hoped  to  find  a  new  fatherland  where 
old  names  should  be  revived  just  as  they  wcre  by  Helenus  in  Epirus. 

635.  Qnia  agite ;  hut,  come  on  !     Gr.  §  262,  n.  9 ;  Z.  §  542. 636.  Nam, 

etc. ;  for  the  form  of  the  prophetess  Cassandra  seerned,  in  a  dream,  to  give  me 

hurning  fire-brands  ;  saying,  here  scek  Troy,  hcre  is  your  home. 638.  Jam 

tcmpns  agi  res  ,  even  now  is  it  the  momcntfor  action ;  literally,  for  things  to 
he  done  is  seasonable  ;  the  infinitive  is  the  subject  of  est,  and  tempu^  is  the 
predicate.     The  prose  form  would  be  tempus  est  res  agendi.     See  Gr.  §  275, 

iii.  n.  1 ;   Z.  §  598  and  659,  n. 639.  Mora ;   supply  sit. Tantis;  so 

great ;  namely,  as  this  dream. Qoatnor  arae  ;  there  were  four  altars  on 

;the  shore,  erected  to  Neptunc,  as  some  undorstand,  by  the  captains  of  the 

■  four  ships,  before  engaging  in  the  race. 641.  Piima.     Comp.  i.  24,  ii. 

613. 642.  Snblata,  etc.     With  her  right  hand  raiscd  on  high,putiing  forth 

all  her  strength,  {connixa,)  she  brandishcs  and  hurls  (the  fire) /roHi  far. 

644.  Iliadnm  ;  ivora  lUas. 646.  Vobis  ;  the  daiivus  ethicus ;  ourformof 

expression  would  be,  yoic  have  not  Berde  hcre. Rliocteia ;  she  is  called 

the  Rhoeteian  from  the  promontory  of  Rhoeteiim,  near  Troy.    See  on  iii.  108. 

648.  Qni  spiritns  illi ;  what  a  {godlike)  air  she  has. 651.  Qnod,  etc. ; 

hecause  she  alone  (of  all)  was  dcprived  of  siich  a  fcstival;  niunere  is  here  the 

festival  in  honor  of  Anchises. 654,  655.  Ocnlis  maliguis  spectare ;  began 

to  looh  with  angry  eyes.     The  infinitive  is  historical. AncipitCS,  ambignae  ; 

uncertain,  hesitating. 655.  Miscrnm  amorcm  ;  strong  desire.     Jfiser  is  not 

unfrequently  applied  to  love,  in  the  sense  of  great  or  deep,  with  the  acces- 

sory  notion  oi  pain-producing. 657.  Paribns  alis.     Comp.  iv.  252.—— 

658.  Arcnm ;  the  track  of  Iris  as  she  mounts  to  heaven  is  the  rainbow. 

659.  Tnm  vero.     When  it  was  manifest  that  a  goddess  had  been  advis- 

ing  them,  they  were  the  more  stimulated  to  executc  their  purpose. 660. 

Focis  pcnetralibns ;  from  the  sacrcd  hcarths ;  i.  e.  of  their  temporary  dwell- 
ings  by  the  sea-shore.     The  fire-place  of  a  house  is  peiietralis,  in  the  pene- 

tralia,  where  is  the  home  altar,  and  sacred  part  of  the  dwelling. Fron- 

dcm;  boughs. 662.  Immissis  Vnlcanns  habenis ;  the  fre  ragcs  with  unhrt- 

dled  fury. 663.  Pictas  ;  painfed.     The  wholo  ship  was  painted ;  hence 

called  fii\TOTrdpriot  by  Homer;  the  stern  is  also  sometimes  spoken  of  scpa- 
rately  as  adorncd  with  painting.  Comp.  H.  0. 1,  14.  The  fire  spreads  ovcr 
the  benclics,  among  the  oars,  and  to  the  sterns,  i.  c.  over  all  parts  of  the 

ships. Abiete;  for  ex  ahieie;  madc  of  fir.     The  word  is  scanned  as  a 

tri.^^yllable,  ah-ye-te  ;  as  in  ii.  16. 664.  Cnucos ;  the  seats.     As  before  in 

the  terms  arena,  theatrum,  circus,  so  here  Yirgil  employs  a  technical  word 
which  is  uot  strictly  apphcable  to  the  place.  The  scmicircular  seats  of  the 
real  theatre  rose  tier  after  tier,  like  steps,  and  were  divided  by  transverse 
alleys  into  equal  compartments,  which  increased  in  width  frora  the  lowest  to 

the  highest  tier,  so  that  each  division  was  in  form  like  a  wcdge. 66l> 

21* 


490  NOTES    ON    TUE    AENEID. 

665.  Nantins  pcrfcrt ;  reports  as  a  messenger ;  translate,  bears  the  tidings 

665.  Incensas  navcs ;  that  the  ships  are  on  fire  ;  the  setting  on  fire  oj 

the  ships.     Gr.  §  274,  It.  5. 667,  668.  Ut— sle ;  even  thus  as  he  was;  not 

laylng  aside  liis  arms,  and  still  mounted. 669.    Clstra  ;    the  fieet ;    as 

drawn  up  on  the  shore.     Comp.  iv.  604. Magistri ;  Hpi/tides  and  others, 

guardians  and  instructors  of  the  boys,  directing  thcm  in  the  equestrian  com- 

bat. 670.  Iste  ;  that  fur>/  of  yonrs.     Gr.  §  207,  R.  25. Qno  tcnditis. 

Gr,  §  191. 672.  En.     With  this  interjection  therc  is  an  ellipsis  of  the 

rerb  esne  or  videre  ;  hence  it  is  followed  cither  by  the  nominative  or  accu.sa- 
tive,  but  usually  by  the  formcr.  Thus  al.«o  it  is  used  as  here  with  the  nomi- 
native  of  a  pronoun  :  lo,  /(am)  your  Ascanius.  Comp.  i.  461 ;  see  Hand's 
Tursell.  vol.  ii.  867.     Ascanius,  while  uttering  these  words,  takes  off  his 

helmet  to  verify  them. 673.  Inancm  ;  empty ;  a  natural  appellative  of 

the  helmet.     Some  understand,  however,  ligkt,  or  mimic,  helmet. 674. 

Lndo ;  nianner  of  ciebat ;  others  connect  it  with  indutus. 675.  Af cclcrat ; 

here  used  intransitively  ;  hasfcns. 676.  Divcrsa  per  litora  ;  along  differeiU 

parts  of  the  shore. 677.  Sicnbi ;  if  anywhcre  (there  are)  hollow  rocks, 

they  stealthily  seektlicm. 679.  Matafae  ;  transformed ;  "  coming  to  them- 

selves." Excnssa ;  Juno,  through  Iris,  had  stimulated  them  to  execute  a 

niad  purpose ;  her  influence  is  now  shakcn  off,  drivcn  from  their  brcasts. 

681.  Posnerc;  haveabated;  have  laid  aside. Cdo ;  watcr  has  been 

cast  on  the  outside,  but  does  not  penetrate  into  the  closely  packed  calkiug 

of  toiu  or  oakum,  through  which  the  fire  is  stealing  its  way. Lentns ;  slow. 

682.  Carinas;  put  for  the/ra?nes  of  the  ships. 683.  Est ;  eats.    See 

on  iv.  66. Vapor;  by  metonymy  for  inccndium. 684.  Vircs  Iieronm  ; 

the  strength  of  hcroes.     Aeneas,  Accstes,  and  the  commanders  of  the  shipa 

take  the  lead  in  the  common  efTort  to  put  do«n  the  fire. 685.  Abscinderc. 

Gr.  §  209,  R.  5  ;  Z.  §  599.     The  garment  was  torn  oft'as  a  token  of  distress. 

687.  Exosns  {es).     Gr.  §  183,  notes  1  and  3. Ad  nnnm  ;  all  without 

ixccption.     The  full  form  in  prose  is  omnes  ad  unum. 688.  Qnld ;  ad- 

verbial  acc.  qualifying  respicit.     If  thy  pity,  which  is  of  old,  has  any  rcgard 

for  mortal  suffcrings. Pictas  ;    compassion ;    as  in  ii.  536. 689.  ])a 

evadcrc;  WicvAWy,  grant  to  the  fiect  to  escape  thefire;  the  infinitive  is  tho 

dircct  object,  as  an  accusative  aftcr  da. Classl ;  the  reniotc  objcct  in  the 

dative.     Evadere  takes  tlie  acc.  also  in  ix.  660. 690.  Tcnnes ;  sinking ; 

rec?MC«c?.^— 691.  Qnod  snpcrcst;  that  which  (alonc)  remains ;  the  only 
thing  which  rcmains  to  consunimate  my  misfortunes,  if  my  ships  are  now 
destroyed,  is  my  own  destruction  by  thy  hand.  Qaod  superest  is  referred 
by  Jahn  and  Thicl  to  the  whole  rcmnant  of  the  Trojans ;  that  which  survires 

of  our  race.    Uut  comp.  xii.  643. «91,  692.  Mortl  dcmitfe  ;  cast  mc  down 

t»  lladrs.     Comp.  ii.  85. 693.  Em:si.s  imbribns ;  rains  bcing  pourcd  out. 

C91.  Sinc  morc  is  equivalent  io  practer  consuctudinctn ;  without  prccc- 

ilcnt ;  .'••iKh  as  moii  never  saw.     Comp.  viii.  635. 695.  Ardua  terrnrum  et 

failipi;  fhc  hills  and  plc.ins. Actlicrc  toto ; /io?;j  the  vhnh  hcarni. 


BOOK    FIFTH.  491 

696.  Tnrbldns  aqna,  etc. ;  a  whirling  shower  intensely  black  vnth  waters,  and 

with  thich  driving  winds.     Ttirbidus  refers  to  the  agitation  of  the  rain,  now 

Bwept  this  way,  now  that,  by  the  successive  blasts. 

Tlie  winds  that  drive  and  rush  violently  without  in- 

termission,  mf^y  be  called  densi,  hke  densis  ictibus, 

thick  cominrf  bloics.     See  above,  459.     Tbey  also   /7 

increase  the  blaekness  of  the  clouds  and  rain  by  ^'^( 

packing  them,  as  it  were,  together. 697.  Super, 

for  desuper ;  from  above.     "The  attempt  of  the 

Trojan  women  to  burn  the  ships  of  Aeneas,  when  in 

Sicily,  is  also  mentioned  by  Dionysius  of  Halicarnas-  jupitcr  pluvius, 

6us,  1,  52,  and  also  by  other  historians."     Ladewig, 

700-778.  Aeneas  in  his  perplexity  is  advised  by  the  aged  Xautes  to  leave  a  portioii 
of  hip  followers  in  Sicily,  to  form  a  new  colony  under  the  rule  of  Acestes.  In  a  noc- 
turnal  vision  Anchises  appears  to  him,  and  approves  of  the  counsel  of  Nautes,  recom- 
mending  that  only  the  hardy  and  warlike  youth  should  be  conveyed  to  Italy.  He  then 
consults  his  captains,  and  Acestes.  The  new  colonists  are  set  apart,  the  ships  are  re- 
paired,  the  new  settlement  is  planted,  a  tcmple  Is  conseci-ated  to  Venus  on  Mount  Eryx,. 
and  all  preparatlons  being  made  for  the  voyage,  the  last  farewells  are  exchanged,  and 
Aeneas,  with  his  diminished  number  of  followers,  sets  sail  once  more  for  Italy. 

TOl,  T02.  Cnras  mntabat  versans;  was  revolviiig  mighty  cares  iii  his 

mind,  now  this  way  now  that,  considcring  whether,  &c. 704.  Unnm  \  niore 

than  all  others. Tritonia.   Seeonii.  171. T06.  Ilaec  ;  these  ;  namely, 

both  those  which,  &c.  Yarro  states  that  the  descendants  of  Xautes  inherit- 
ed  from  him  the  priesthood  of  Minerva.  She  inspired  him  with  prophetic 
power,  just  as  she  is  said  by  CalHmachus  (Hynm  in  Min.  121)  also  to  have 

made  Tiresias  a  prophet. T08.  Solatns  ;  as  a  present  participle.     Comp. 

i.  312. Isqne  ;  and  so  he  ;  and  therefore  lie.     Z.  §  833. Tll.  Est  tibi ; 

you  have. Divinae  Stirpis  ;  Acestes  is  the  son  of  the  river  god  Crimisus. 

See  above,  38. T12.  Volenteni ;  not  if  he  is  willing,  but  since  he  is  wil- 

ling. T13.  Snpcrant;  for  supersunt ;  those  ivho  are  too  many  (for  our  re- 

maining  ships)  their  skijjs  having  been  lost ;  referring  to  the  mcn  and  women 

belonging  to  the  four  ships  that  were  burned. T16.  Qnidqnid  ;  whatevcr 

there  is,  &c.     Indefinite  pronouns  and  adjectives  iu  the  neuter  gender  are 

oftcn  used  of  persons. TIT.  Habeant  sine ;  suffer  to  have.     See  on  16o, 

T18.  Permisso  nomine ;   the  name  of  Acesta  being  allowed  by  you, 

though  you  yourself  are  the  truc  founder  of  the  city.  Cicero,  in  Verr.  iv. 
33,  72,  says  that  Segesta  (the  name  then  given  by  the  Romans  to  Acesta  or 
Egesta)  was  founded  by  Aeneas,  and  that  the  people  from  that  circumstance 
held  themselves  bound  to  the  Eomans,  not  only  as  allies  and  friends,  but 

also  as  kinsmen. T19.  luccasus  ;  was  roused  to  action ;  with  our  punctua- 

tion  e&t  is  nnderstood.     Wagner  puts  only  a  comma  aftcr  the  participle, 

thus  connecting  ^vith  the  following  sentcnce :  being  roused — then  truly. 

«20.  Animo.  Comp.  viii.  370.  Jahn  has  adopted  this  reading,  which  is 
giveu  by  the  Medicean  and  other  manuscripts,  as  being  better  authonticated 


492 


NOTES   ON    THE   AENEID. 


than  animum ;  in  citlier  case  tlie  sense  of  the  passage  is  as  follows :  tken 

intleed  he  is  distracted  in  mind  with  all  anxieties. 721.  Nox.     Xi"-ht  ia 

borue  in  a  chariot.  She  is  usually  fancied  by  the  poets  to  rise  in  the  cast 
at  sunsct  and  follow  in  the  footstcps  of  tlic  sun,  but  soinetinies  she  was  con- 
ceived  to  rise  in  the  west  when  the  sun  sets,  attain  the  zcnith  at  midni.slit, 
and  disappear  in  the  east  when  the  sun  rises.     See  Ueyne's  Excurs.  ii"  to 

Aen.  Book  ii. ;  comp.  ii.  8,  iii.  512. Bigis  snbvefta  ;  haviiif/  bcen  carried 

up  (havinff  ascended)  in  her  chariot. Polnm  tenebat ;  was  in  mid-heaven  ; 

the  zenith. T28.  Pnlcherrima ;  translate  in  the  antecedent  clause ;  l/it 

most  excellent  counsch,  which,  &c.     See  on  i.  419. 730.  Dnra  atq.  asper» 

cnltn;  hardi/  and  savage  in  habits  of  life. 731,  732.  «itls  domos ;  the 

abodes  of  Pluto.  He  is  called  the  Dives,  Dis,  or  n\o{,Tc.^y,  bccausc  his  realms 
nre  the  interior  of  the  earth,  which  was  regarded  .as  the  source  of  all  richcs. 

Inle;  first;  i.  c.  beforc  you  proceed  to  Lajiuni. 732.  irerna  per 

alta,  etc. ;  seek  an  intervietv  with  me  through  dcep  Avernus.  Sec  Gr.  g  92,  1. 
The  passages  to  the  lower  world  most  frequently  mentioncd  werc  those  of 
Taenarus  in  Laconia,  and  Avernus  on  the  bay  of  Xaples.  Avcrnus  is  the 
name  of  a  small  lakc,  occupying  the  crater  of  an  ancient  volcano.     A  cavcrn 

on  the  side  of  the  lake  was  supposcd  to  communicate  with  Hadcs. 734, 

Tartara  tristesqne  nmbrae ;  hendiadys  for  the  gloomy  shades  of  Tartarus. 
Sce  on  i.  Gl.  Tartarus  was  that  part  of  Hades  which  was  set  apart  for  the 
confinement  of  the  guilty.     For  the  declension  of  Ihrtarus,  see  Gr.  §92,  1. 

J35.  Colo  ;  /  dwell  amidst.     The  6  is  not  el:  Jed. Sibrlla.     See  iii. 

452. 736.  Nigrarnm  ;  black  victims  were  sacrificed  to  thc  infcrnal  gods. 

Sce  vi.  243  sq. Sangnine  ;  an  ablative  of  instrument  or  means.     By  slay- 

ing  raany  black  victims  she  will  secure  an  cntrance  for  you. 738.  Tor- 

qnct  enrsns ;  she  has  passed  the  zenith  and  is  turning  her  course  down 

towards  the  horizon. 739.  Saevns  ;  pitiless ;  for  it  breaks  off  my  intcr- 

vjew  with  you.  Ghosts  and  dreams  can  visit  thc  earth  only  in  the  night, 
and  must  flce  beforc  the  dawn.     Thus  the  Ghost  in  Hamlet,  1,5: 

Fare  thce  wcll  at  once  ! 
Tho  glow-worni  showe  the  matin  to  bc  iic.nr. 

741.  "Qno"  dclnde  "  rnls  "— inqnit ;  Jahn  and  Tliicl  follow  Scrvius  in 

thus  joining  dcinde  viiih  itiquit ;  Acneas  exclaims :  %vhithcr  chi  i/oii  hastcn, 
&c.     Wagncr  puts  thc  adverb  with  r«<.s-;  whither  do  you  h;is(cn  ?o  soon? 

without  longer  dclay  ? Prorlpis ;  supply  tc. 743.  Sopitos  ignes ;   he 

rcnews  thc  fircs  on  the  domestic  hcarth,  that  hc  may  oflcr  inconse  to  Vesta 
and  the  Pcnatcs.  It  seems  to  have  bccn  usual  to  pcrform  such  an  act  of 
worship  after  thc  appearance  of  a  vision,  jnst  as  in  thc  case  of  prodiHos. 

Comp.  iii.  177. 744.  Larem ;  pcrhaps  ihc  deified   Anchiscs,  but  niore 

probably  thc  Fergamcan  Penates  are  nicant. (anae  ;  the  rencrable,  tbe 

-"arv,  becauso  she  was  one  of  thc  most  ancicnt  doilies;  the  only  onc,  per- 
aps.  who  was  rcally  aucl  originally  common  to  Grocce  and  Italy. P(i|ie- 


BOOK    FIFTH.  493 

tralia;  the  shrine;  for  the  goddess  herself.     Her  image  was  kept  under  the 

charge  of  Aeneas  in  the  most  secret  part  of  his  dwelli.ig. 7-15t  Farre 

pio  ;  the  7noIa  salsay  or  salted  meal. Plcna  acerra  ;  with  full  censer  ;  full 

of  iucense.  Hor.  0.  3,  8,  2 :  acerra  turis  plena.  In  the  time  of  Aeneas, 
however,  incense  was  not  used.     The  poet  has  in  mind  the  custom  of  his 

own  times. 746.  Primnm.    See  on  iii.  437. ^750.  Transcribant ;  (het/ 

assign  the  matrons  to  the  city  ;  strictly,  they  transfer  them  from  among  the 
Trojans  to  the  new  city  by  enrolling  them  among  its  citizeus.  Transcribere 
was  said  of  a  mere  transfer  frora  one  city  to  anothcr;  ascribere  of  assigiiiiig 

to  a  colony. -rrbi  is  for  in  wbeni. Popnlnmqne  voleutem  ;  the  people 

desirinr/  it ;  referring  to  those  of  the  men  who  wished  to  remain.— ^ — 7.51. 

AnimoSj  etc. ;  spirits  not  at  all  moved  by  ihe  desire  of  great  glory. Xil  is 

emphatic ;    not  at  all. 752.    Reponnnt ;    they  replace  iu  the  vessels  th^ 

timbers  which  have  been  in.jurcd  by  the  flames,  (and)  prcpare  both  odrs  and 

cordage. 753.   Rndentesqae   is   connected  with  the  following  verse  in 

scanning. 754.  Bello  ;  the  dative  after  vivida ;  fevi  (indeed)  in  nmnber, 

but  (whose)  spirit  is  ardent  for  war. 755.  Designat  aratro  ;  this  was  a 

sacred  ceremouy  in  marking  out  the  boundary  of  a  ncw  city.  "  The  build- 
ers  of  a  city,"  says  Servius,  "yoked  an  ox  and  cow  together,  the  ox  on  the 
right  and  the  cow  on  the  left ;  and  in  the  Gabine  cincture, — that  is,  with  the 
toga  partly  drawn  over  the  head,  and  partly  fasteued  round  the  waist, — 
held  the  plough-handle  so  curved  that  all  the  sods  fell  inward.  And  by  the 
furrow  thus  drawn  they  designated  the  places  for  the  walls,  while  thcy  lifted 

the  plough  over  the  places  where  gates  werc  to  be  built." 756.  Donios  ; 

he  allots  the  places  for  dwellings. Ilinm,  haec  Trojam  ;  he  directs  them  to 

look  upon  this  (city)  as  their  Hium,  upon  these  places  (around  the  city)  os 

Troy. 758.  Indicit  fornm,  etc. ;  he  appoints  the  busi^iess  of  the  forum, 

and  having  summoned  the  senators  he  anfiounces  his  decrees.  Forum  seems 
here  to  be  put  for  judicia,  the  courts,  the  proceediugs  of  which  constituted 
the  characteristic  business  of  the  forum  in  Virgirs  time.  Instead  of  the 
ablative  absolute,  Wagner  and  others  make  patribiis  the  dative,  and  the 
sense  of  the  clause :  he  gives  organic  laws,  and  rules  of  procedure,  to  the 

convcned fathers.    The  former  interpretation  is  preferable. 759.  Erycino. 

See  on  i.  570. 760.   Idaliae.     See  on  i.  681. Tnmnlo  sacerdos ;   a 

priest,  or  flamen  is  appointcd  to  the  tomb  of  Anchises,  and  tlie  wood  far 
around  it  is  set  apart,  or  consecrated;  late  saccr ;  sacred  far  around ;  as 

pertaining  to  the  .shrine. 761.  Anclliseo ;  a  possessive  form  for  the  geni- 

tive.     See  on  i.  200. 762.  Novem ;  nine   days  was  the  .ceremonial  time 

for  the  continuance  of  festivals.      See  Smith's  Dict.  Antiq.,  novendiale ; 

comp.  64. Aris ;  ablat.  of  situation ;  and  samfice  had  been  performcd  on 

the  altars. 763.  Placidi  stravernnt;  tranquil  winds  calmcd  the  waters ; 

left  them  free  from  boisterous  waves.     Gomp.  iii.  69.      Quiim,  answering  to 

iam  iu  tbe  preceding  clause,  is  omitted  here,  as  in  ix.  459. 764.  Creber 

et  adspirans  ;  fresh  and  favorabJe.     Crebcr  in  its  primitive  sense,  as  iii.  530, 


494  NOTES   ON    TUE    AENEID, 

crehrescunt. T68.  Non  tolerabilc  Domcn ;   abovc,  613,  617,  the  women 

were  described  as  gaziiig  upon  the  grcat  sea,  and  weeping,  and  as  weary  of 
suftering  {pcrfcrrc)  its  hardt^hips.  The  very  name  of  the  sca  was  suggestivc 
of  woe,  and  was  intolcrable.  Kurnen,  given  in  many  editions  on  tlio  bcst 
ttuthority,  is  less  Hkely  to  be  the  true  reading,  as  no  numen  or  divine  power 
ivas  ascribed  to  the  sea,  and  a  numen  could  hardly  be  called  intolcrabile, 

witliout  disrespect. 770.   Qnos.     Gr.  §  205,  R.  2,  (1). 771.   Consan- 

gniuco;  Acestes  is  Dardanian. 772.  Eryci ;  a  sacrifice  is  made  to  Eryx, 

the  dcified  hero,  as  one  of  the  gods  of  the  phice,  and,  as  in  iii.  120,  to  the 
Storms,  as  divine  powers  which  may  forbear  to  molest  them,  if  propitiated. 

773.  Ex  ordine ;  one  aftcr  another.     Comp.  vii.  139. 771.   Capnt ; 

the  Greek  acc.  limiting  evinctus. — ; — Tonsac  ;  trimmed.  See  above,  556. 
The  olive  was  used  not  only  for  victors'  crowns,  but  sometimes  also  for  those 

of  priests  and  persons  making  sacrificcs.     It  was  the  symbol  of  peacc. 

776.  Porricit.     Comp.  235-238. 

779-S71.  Venus,  in  her  dread  of  thc  pcrsistent  anger  of  Juno,  aijpeals  to  Neptnne 
for  his  interposition  to  prcvent  any  further  dis.ister  by  sea  to  the  fleet  of  Aeneas. 
Neptune  reniinds  hcr  of  his  former  fricndly  acts  to  Aeneas  both  on  sea  and  land,  and 
promises  now  to  protect  him,  rcciuiring,  liowcver,  th;it  one  of  his  crew  shall  be  lost  on 
the  voyagc.  Mcanwhilc,  the  whole  fleet  proceeds  under  fuU  sail,  led  by  the  ship  of 
Acncas,  wliich  ia  steered  by  the  pilot  Palinurus.  In  the  night  Aeneas  and  all  on 
board  full  .asleep,  except  Palinurus,  who  watches,  and  keeps  the  helm  alonc.  Somnua 
dcsccnds  from  thc  sky,  and  tcmpts  him  to  sleep,  ai:  1,  in  spite  of  his  rcsistanco,  over- 
powcrs  hini  with  the  Lethean  influcncc. 

Palinurus  falls  over  into  the  sca,  still  grusping  the  hchii,  aud  carrying  a  fragmcnt 
of  tho  ship,  torn  ofl"with  it. 

Aeneas  is  awakcned  by  the  irregular  motion  of  tho  sliip,  and,  pcrcciviiig  thc  fate 
whicli  lias  befallcu  Palinurus,  bcmoans  liis  loss,  wliilo  lie  himsclf  directs  the  coursc. 

781.  Nec  cxsattrabiie  pectns ;  and  her  insatiate  revenrje  ;  in  translating 
it  is  best  to  separate  the  ncgative  in  nec  from  the  copula  here,  as  often 

elsewhere. 782.  Onines;aW;  evcn  the  most  humiliating. 783.  Longa 

dles ;  length  of  time. Pietas ;  his  picty  in  general,  as  well  as  towarda 

Juno.     Ile  made  an  offering  to  Juno,  iii.  547. 784.  Infrarta ;  suhducd; 

from  infringerc.     Comp.  ix.  499,  x.  731,  xii.  1.     Juno  knows  the  fates  con- 

cerning  Aeneas,  bat  she  still  persists. 785.  Excdissc ;  Hterally,  to  have 

devoured;  strongly  exprcssive  of  her  hatrcd,   so  liorrible  tiiat  it  cannot 

be  uttercd,  nrfandls. 78C.  Traxe ;  for  traxisse.     See  Gr.  §  162,  7,  (c); 

Z.  §  160,  2. Pocnani  pcr  oninem  ;  ihrongh  all  suffcring ;  that  is,  of  the 

ten  years'  siege.' 787.  Rcliquias,  etc. ;  she  pursues  fhe  rcmnant  of  Trou, 

Ihe  (very)  asAes  and  bones  of  tJic  cili/  .shc  has  dcstroyed.  Jicliquias  in  former 
editions  has  been  usiialiy  joincd  with  traxe  (traxisse);  but  thc  bcst  connnen- 
tators  now  adopt  the  rcading  here  given,  takcn  by  Wagner  from  the  Medi- 

cean  manuscript. 788.  Sf Int  illa ;  she  inai/  hiow ;    no  othcr  dcity  can 

nndcrstand  thc  causeofsucli  unreasonable  spitc. 789.  Tn  tcstis;  supply 

jras;  you  yourself  latcJy  icitvessed  on  thc  ^African  viaves.     Soe  i.  50,  sq, 


BOOK    FIFTH.  495 

791.  Ncqnidqnaiil ;  in  vain;  for  Neptune  had  thwarted  her  attempt,  by  re- 

pelling  the  winds  of  Aeolus. 793.  Per  scelns  aetis  ;  behold,  having  urrjed 

on  the  matrons  to  crime,  she  has  shamefv.lly  burned  up  the  feet.  Per  scelus 
is  not  an  adverbial  expression  for  sceleste,  wickedly,  but  a  suhstitute  for  ad, 
or  in  scelus ;  meaning,  through  all  the  steps  of  critne  ;  from  the  first  idea  of 
the  criminal  act,  and  from  the  ripened  purpose,  to  the  execution  of  the 

(Jeed. T94.  Snbegit ;   supply  eum  or  Aenean. Classe ;   a  part  of  tbe 

fleet. 796.  Quod  snperest;  as  the  only  thing  tliat  remainn ;  i.  e.  to  bt; 

asked  for.     Some,  with  Heync,  refer  it  to  "the  remnant"  of  the  fleet:  maj 

you  suffer  that  (part  of  the  fleet)  ivhich  is  spared,  &e. 79T.  Tibi ;  join 

with  vela  dare;  let  it  be  lavful  (for  them)  to  commit  their  sails  snfcly  to  you; 
to  your  protection.  So  Thiel  and  Ladewig,  following  some  of  the  earlier 
commentators.     Heyne  takes  tihi  for  per  te,  hke  (Toi  for  5ia  rre,  meaning,  so 

far  as  depends  on  you. Laareuteni.     The  Tiber  is  here  calied  Laurentian 

from  Laurentum,  which  was  the  capital  of  the  Latini. 798.  Ea  moenia ; 

that  city  which  Aeneas  is  aiming  to  estabhsh  in  Italy. 800.  Omue  ;  for 

omnino ;  it  is  ■whoUy  right,- 801.  Unde  genns  dncis ;  whence  you  derive 

your  birth ;  she  sprung  from  the  foam  of  the  sea.     See  on  i.  25*7. Qno- 

qne ;  it  is  not  only  right  by  the  laws  of  nature,  but  also  I  have  by  my  own 
friendly  acts  deserved  yotlt  confidence.  The  frequent  occasions  referred  to 
on  the  sea  are  such  as  are  mentioned  in  i.  125  sq.,  iii.  192  sq.,  v.  10  sq. ; 
though  the  direct  iuterference  of  Xeptune  is  mentioned  only  in  the  first  of 

these  passages. 805.   Impingeret  agmina  mnris ;   hurled  thcir  terrifiea 

battalions  against  the  tvalls.     The  reference  is  to  Hom.  II.  xxi.  294,  295. 

807.  Nec  rcperire  Tiam.     Comp.  Hom.  II.  xxi.  218,  219. 808.  Xan- 

tlins  ;  another  namc  for  the  Scamander. 809.  Congressnm ;  havi-ig  mcl 

the  son  of  Peleus  icith  neither  gods  nor  strength  equal.     Comp.  Hom.  II.  xx. 

318-339. 810.  Nnbe  cava.     See  ou  ii.  360. Yertere  ;    to  overthroic. 

See  ii.  610-612. 811.  Perjnrae  ;  Troy  is  called  false,  because  her  king, 

Laomedon,  had  violated  his  promise  to  Neptune  to  pay  him  a  stipulated  re- 

ward  for  building  the  walls  of  the  city. 813.  Quos  optas  ;  ichich  (harbors) 

^oM  (/mVe  (to  rcach.) Portns  AYerni ;  the  harbors  of  Averims  ;  referring 

especially  to  Cumae,  which  is  near  Lake  Avernus. 81X.  Unns  erit  tantnni, 

etc. ;  there  shall  be  one  only,  %vhom  he  (Aeneas)  shall  seek  in  the  surging 

deep  ;  PaUnurus  is  the  destined  victim. 815.  Caput ;   for  vita. 816. 

Laeta ;  proleptical,  for  lic  soothcd  the  breast  of  the  goddess  so  that  it  was  joy- 

ous.     Sce  on  i.  637. 817.    Anro ;    for  aareo  jugo.     Aurvm  frequently 

stands  for  that  which  is  made  of  gold;  as  i.  739,  vii.  279,  et  al. 818. 

Feris;  steeds.     Comp.  ii.  51. 820.  Snbsidunt  nnd.ie ;  Neptune  calms  the 

waters  by  riding  lightly  over  them  in  his  chariot ;  as  i.  147. Axe  tcnanti ; 

under  his  thundering  car ;  axis  is  for  currus,  as  frcquently. 821.  Aquis, 

for  mari ;  an  ablative  of  situation ;  the  swollen  surface  is  laid  calm  on  ihe  wa- 
i:r.     Comp.  763. Fnginnt ;  disappcar. Vasto  aetliere  scems  to  be  sy 


496 


NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 


nonyinous  here  with  a^ra  inaymim  in  i.  300 ;  the  unhoundcd  heavcn.  Wag« 
ner  substitutcs  fugiuntquc  <«  acthcre  nirnbi,  on  the  autliority  of  a  siugle 
manuscript.     Neptune  is  attendcd  by  a  numerous  train  of  marine  divinitios 

and  monsters. S22.  Cetc  ;  pl.  of  cctos,  a  sca  monstcr ;  for  tiieplural  of 

this  and  a  few  otlier  Greek  noung  of  similar  form,  see  Gr.  §  04 ;  Z.  g  80. 

823.    Senlor ;   a  term  often  applied  to  marine  deities. Palacmon, 

calied  also  Mclicerta,  and  J^ortunus,  (sce  abovc,  241,)  was  tlie  son  of  Ino; 

hence  Inous. 824.  Tritoiics.     See  on  i.  144. Phorci ;  Phorcns.     Sce 

above,  240. 825.  Tenet.     Gr.  §  209,  note  9. Thctis ;   daughtcr  of 

Nereus  and  Doris,  and  mother  of  Achilles. Mclite  ;  Panopea  ;  these  also, 

and  all  those  that  follow,  were  Nereides,  or  daughtcrs  of  Ncreus.  See  on 
240,  above.  Virgil  appears  in  the  passage,  820-826,  to  have  in  view  a 
group  of  statuary  by  Scopas,  which  stood  in  tlie  Flaminian  circus  at  Romc, 
and  is  described  in  Pliny^s  Naturul  Ilistory,  xxxvi.  5. 827.  Ilif,  etc.    Now 


Nereids  and  Triions. 
calmjoy  in  tnrn  pcrvadcs  thc  anzioui  mind  of/ather  Aeneas.     Comp.  i.  502. 

829.  Attolli  nialos ;  he  ordcrs  all  the  masts  (the  masts  of  all  the  fleet)  to 

ve  spcedilij  raised.     The  masts  were  not  fixtures,  but  could  be  raised,  low- 

ered,  and  removcd,  as  circumstances  demanded.     Comp.  487. lutcndi 

brachia  velis  ;  the  yards  to  he  spread  with  the  .'sails.     We  can  also  say,  rc/a 

brachiis  intcndere. ^830.  Feccre  pedom  ;  ihoj  all  tackcd  togcthcr ;  all  the 

vessels,  governed  by  the  niovcnicnts  of  l'aliuurus,  took  thc  wiud  now  on  the 
one  side  of  the  ship,  uow  ou  the  other.  Pes  was  thc  name  of  the  ropea 
called  by  us  the  "sheets,"  at  the  lowcr  corners  of  the  sail.s,  which  were  al- 
ternatcly  "lct  out"  and  "shortcncd,"  according  as  thc  ship  took  thc  wiud 

from  thc  right  or  lcft.     Faccre  pedcni  is  to  manage  the  shcct. 831.  Sol- 

VCrc ;  thcy  simultaneously  opencd  thc  canvas,  now  on  the  left,  now  on  thc 
riglit,  The  yards  themsclves  are  also  turned  to  one  sidc  or  thc  othcr  whcu 
the  sheets  are  hauled  or  loosened.  This  was  cffected  by  ropcs  attachcd  to 
the  cornua,  or  cxtrcmitics  of  the  yards,  and  made  fast  to  the  sidcs  of  the 
vcssel.  These  movements  of  the  yards  arc  cxpresscd  by  tor.jucut  dctor- 
quentque;  and  also  in  iii.  549,  by  obvcrtcre.    Sec  Sinith's  Dict.  .^nti.].,  aiticlo 

Anttnna. 832.  Sua;  theirown;  that  is, /,riwc<6/c. 833,834.  Dciisum 

agmcn  ;  thc  sq^iadronfollowing  in  closc  arrai/.  —834.  .td  linnc  ;  fhc  othcrs 
were    co.nmandcd  to  dircct   iheir  conrsc    accorditig  io  hiin ;    ralinurus. 


BOOK    FIFTH.  497 

835.  Mediam  mctam  ;  the  zenith. 837.  Sub  remis ;  ihe  ships  were  under 

sail,  and  the  oars  were  unnecessary  ;  hence  thc  men  were  suffered  to  indulge 
in  sleep,  stretcbed  along  the  hard  wooden  benches,  {dura  sedilia,')  hy  thcir 

oars. 839.  Dispalit  ambras.     Somnus  did  not  disperse  the  darkness,  but 

passed  through  it,  parting  it,  as  it  were,  in  his  descent. 840.  Somnia 

tristia;  fatal  slumbers. 841.  Insonti ;  not  dcserving  such  a  fate.        -Con- 

SCdit ;  from  consido.-. 842.  Pliorbanti ;  this  was  the  name  of  a  son  of 

Priam,  mentioned  in  Hom.  II.  xiv.  490. 813.  IjJsa;  the  waters  make  a 

pilot  tinnecessary ;  they  are  so  favorable  to  your  course,  aiid  so  tranquil, 

they  of  themselves  convey  the  fleet  safely. 814.  Aeqnatae  ;  sieady  ivinds; 

such  as  make  the  SdiWa- aequata.     See  iv.  587.     Translate,  tlie  winds  breathe 

fair. 845.  Labori;  the  dative  is  rare  after/?«)-ar?',     Sce  Gr.  §  224,  II.  2. 

——846.  Taa  manera  inibo ;  I  will  enter  on  thy  duties. 847.  Vix  ;  Pali- 

nurus  is  already  oppressed  with  drowsiness,  under  the  influence  of  Somiius. 

849.  Monstro ;  the  sea  is  so  termed,  because  it  is  a  thing  full  of  treach 

ery  and  peril. 850.  Acnean,  etc.     For  why  shoxdd  I  trust  Aeneas  (to  if^, 

liaving  been  deceivcd  so  often  (as  I  haTC  already)  by  the  fiattering  winds,  and 

hy  the  treachery  of  a  ccdm  sky? Qnld  enim.     What  counection  these 

words  are  intended  to  express  is  very  doubtful.  With  our  punctuation  per- 
haps  the  following  interpretation  may  be  adopted :  Do  you  ask  me  to  con- 
fide  even  myself  to  this  monster?  No.  Then  surely  not  Aeneas;  for  why 
should  I  trust  Aeneas  to  it,  after  being  deceived  so  often,  &c.  ?  Others 
omit  the  comma  after  eyihn,  and  join  auris  with  credam,  translatiiig  the  fol- 

Io\ying  et  deceptus,  "  especially  after  being  deceived." 853.    Nasqaam ; 

occasionally,  as  here,  for  nunquam. Amittebat ;  the  last  syllable  length- 

ened.     See  note  on  gravia,  iii.  4G4. Sub  astra;  up  towards  the  stars. 

854.  Letbaeo ;  steepedin  Lethean  dew,  it  mcrely  produced  forgetfulness ; 

but  when  the  branch  was  vi  soporatnm  Stygia,  drugged  ivith  Stygian  virtue, 

it  imparted  a  death-Iike  sleep. 856.  Cnnctanti ;  to  (of )  him  resisting  the 

infiuence. IVatantia  is  proleptic. Lnniina  soKit ;  Somnus  relaxed  and 

closed  the  eyes  of  Palinurus,  which  had  beeu  strained  and  fixed  steadily  on 

the  stars. 857.  Primos ;  fovprimum;  scarcely  had  the  unexpected  sleep 

first  unnerved  his  limbs. 858.  Et,  for  quum ;  as  in  iii.  9,  et  al. Cnm 

pnppis  parte  rcTuIsa.     Some  look  upon  the  words  frora  cimi  to  guheroiaclo 

inclusive,  as  an  interpolation. 861.  Ipse  ;  Somnus. Ales;  asabird; 

a  winged  creature  ;  so  Hor.  0.  1,  2,  42 :  ales  in  terris  filius  Maiae 862. 

Carrit ;  pursues ;  transitively,  as  in  iii.  191. 863.  Proniissis.     Gr.  §  249. 

864.  Jamqne  adeo ;  andnoweven;  that  i.s,  it  was  even  so  far  on  the 

way,  that  it  was  approaching  tbe  rocks  of  the  Sirens.  These  were  off  the 
southern  coast  of  Campania.     They  were  difficiles  quondam,  dangerous  for- 

merly,  that  is,  when  Ulysses  sailed  over  this  sea. Tum ;  then ;  at  the 

time  when  Acneas  approached  they  were  resounding  afur  with  the  constant 
Burf. 869.-9Iulta  gemens.    See  on  L  465. Animnm  cancnssn^i  smilte?i 


498 


NOTES    ON    TUE   AENEID. 


in  his  mind;  for  the  acc.  see  on  i.  228. 8T1.  Nodas,  Ignota ;  to  die 

away  from  one's  native  land,  was  a  great  niisfortune,  but  the  greatest  of  all 
was  to  be  dcprived  of  burial;  to  bo  left  uncovercd  on  the  ground.  Palinu- 
rus,  soon  after  his  death,  meets  Aeneas  iu  Hades,  (see  vi.  347-351,)  and 
gives  him  the  particulars  of  his  fate. 


The  SirenB. 


BOOK   SIXTH.  499 


BOOK  SIXTH. 

Arrival  of  Aeneas  at  Cumae.     His  descent  to  Hadeg 
and  interview  witli  the  sliade  of  Ancliises. 

1-155.  Aeneas  lands  at  Cumae,  and  immediatcly  proceeds  to  tho  temx>Ie  of  Apcl  t 
on  the  Acropolis,  to  consult  the  Sibyl.  Deipholje  the  Sibyl,  who  is  also  priestess  of 
Hecate,  informs  him  of  his  future  wars  and  hardships,  and  instructs  hira  how  to  pre- 
pare  for  his  proposed  descent  into  the  lower  regionB. 

1.  Sic  fatnr  lacrimans»     These  words  closely  connect  tlie  narrative  of 
the  Fifth  and  Sixth  Books.     So  Books  vii.,  ix.,  and  xiii.,  of  the  Odjsscy,  are 

connected  immediately  with  those  which  precede  them. Imniitit  habenas; 

gives  reins ;  in  viii.  TOS,  it  is  immittere  funes. 2.  Eaboicis  Cumarnni  5 

Cumae,  a  city  situated  on  the  coast  of  Campania,  was  founded  in  vcry 
ancient  times  by  a  colony  of  Greeks  from  Chalcis,  (now  Negropont,)  in  tlie 
island  of  Euboea ;  hence  the  terms  Euboean  and  C/ialcicUan  are  applied  to 
the  city  of  Cumae  and  to  objects  connected  with  it.  Strabo  calls  Cumae  the 
most  ancient  of  all  the  Italian  and  Sicihan  cities.  After  passing  through 
many  vicissitudes  of  fortune,  it  was  at  last  utterly  destroyed  in  the  thirteenth 
century  by  the  people  of  Naples  and  Aversa.  Its  site,  marked  by  the  ruins 
of  temples  and  villas,  is  often  visited  by  modern  travellers.  The  following 
view  of  Cumae  and  its  environs  presents  in  the  distance  near  the  sea  the 
abrupt  height  of  the  Acropolis,  on  which  stood  the  temple  of  Apollo  and 
grove  of  Diana.  In  its  sides  were  excavated  many  subterrancan  passages, 
sorae  of  which  communicated  with  the  holy  place  of  the  oracle,  or  grotto  of 
the  Sibyl.  These  caverns  are  stili  in  existence,  and  have  been  cleared  out 
and  explored  to  some  extent,  though  mostly  filled  with  ruins  and  rubbish. 

3>  Obvertnnt.     On  landing,  the  prow  of  the  ship  was  turned  towards 

Uie  water,  and  the  stern  towards  the  shore,  that  the  ship  might  be  ready  to 

put  to  sea  again. Dente  tenaei ;  with  tenacious  fluke  ;  iu  i.  169,  morsu  is 

used  iustead  of  dente. 4.   Fnndabat ;   held  to  the  bottom,  cr  secured ; 

equivalent  to  fundo  affigebat.     Observe  the  imperfect  interchanged  with  the 

historical  present. 5»  Emicat ;  springs  or  darts  ;  as  in  v.  337. 7.  \\i- 

gtrnsa  in  venis  silicis.     Comp.  i.  174.     Fire  and  food  are  first  thought  of  w. 

.anding. 8.  Tecta  rapit ;   part  quicMy  penetrate  the  forests,   the  densi 

dwellings  of  the  wild  beasts,  and  point  ouz  the  discocered  sireams.  Jiapit, 
like  corripere,  i.  418,  is  equivalent  to  cursu  rapit,  and  means  here  hurria 
into  or  through.     Running  water  [flumina')  must  be  used  for  purification 

before  they  can  approach  the  shrine  of  Apollo. 9.  Arccs  :  for  the  singu- 

lar,  which  is  used  in  tlie  I7th  verse ;  thc  Acropolis,  on  which  stood  tlie  tcm- 


500 


NOTES   ON    TUE    AENEID. 


BOOK    SIXTH. 


501 


plc  of  Apollo,  who  is  thercfore  called  altus.     The  templc  is  surrouuded  bv  a 

grove  consecrated  to  Heeate  orthe  iufernal  Diana. 10.  Horrendae  procnl 

sesreta  Sibyllae  ;  the  solitude  of  the  awe-inspiring  Sihyl  at  some  dinta^ice ;  at 
a  distance,  namely,  from  the  temple ;  it  was  entered  at  the  side  of  the  hill. 

See  above,  note  2. 11.  Cni,  etc. ;  to  whoin  the  Delian  prophet  imparts 

(by  inspiration)  great  infelUcfence  and  a  great  spirit.  Thiel  and  others  intor- 
pret  the  passage  as  translated  above ;  but  Heyne  prefers  to  take  inspirat  m 
the  sense  o{  incitat ;  in  which  case  cui  is  cquivalent  to  cujtts,  and  the  trnr.s- 
lation  becomes,  whose  grcat  inind  and  spirit  the  Delian  prophet  inspires., 
For  Dclins,  see  on  iii.  162.  Jlens,  when  used  iu  connection  with  animns, 
denotes    thc    intellect,  and    aniimcs    in    contrast  with  it    includes  all  the 

ofher  poicers  and  ojierations  ofthe  soul. 13.  Trivlae  ;  Hecate.     See  on  iv. 

511. Anrea  Tecta;  the  golden  temple.     See  on 

9. 14.    Dacdalns.       According    to    tradition, 

Daedalus  was  an  Atheuian,  and  the  pioneer  of 

Athcnian  art,  though  he  is  sometimes  called  Cre- 

tan,  on  account  of  his  rcsidence  in  Crete  under 

king  Minos,  for  whom  he   built  the   celebrated 

Lab}rinth.      Having   oftended    Minos   by    aiding 

Pasiphae  in  the  commission  of  an  unnatural  crime, 

Daedalus  was  imprisoned  with  his  son  Icarus  in 

the  Labyrinth,   from   whence    he   effected   their 

escape  by  contriving  artificial  wings  with  wax 

and  other  materials.      Icarus  flew  too  near  the 

sun,  so  that  the  heat  melted  his  wings  and  he  fell 

iuto  that  part  of  the  Mediterraneau  called,  after 

liim,  the  Icarian  sea.     Daedalus,  flying  towards 

the  north,  {ad  arctos,)  according  to  one  tradition,  Hecate,  or  Trivia. 

landed  safely  in  Sicily ;  according  to  another,  which  Virgil  adopts,  he  first 

alighted  on  the  Acropolis  of  Cumae. 15.  Pcnnls;  with  swift  wings ;  ab- 

lative  of  manner. 16.  Enavit ;  iov  evolavit ;  few  ;  so  tranat,  iv.  24:5. 

A(l ;  towards ;  not  actually  to  the  Arctic  regions. IT.    CbalcidiciJ.     See 

note  above,   on  2. 18.  Redditus;  returning  (literally,   having  heen  re- 

stored)jirst  to  this  land ;  reaching  the  earth  again  first  at  this  point.  Rcdux, 
reddere,  and  kindred  words,  are  used  of  objects  coraing  back  frorn  the  air  or 
water  to  the  land,  at  whatever  point  the  land  is  reached  again.     Comp.  i. 

390. Sacrayit ;  devoted.     He  suspeuded  his  wings  in  the  temple  of  Apollo 

as  a  thank-offering  for  his  preservation.  Memeutos  and  tokens  of  gratitude 
were  thus  hung  up  in  temples  by  sailors  and  others  who  escapcd  from  pcrils 

by  sea,  and  a  similar  practice  is  still  preserved  to  some  extent  in  Italy. 

19.  Remiglnni  alaram  ;  for  the  simple  alas. 20.     On  the  folds  or  valves 

[forihus)  of  the  dcor,  Daedalus  had  represented  in  raised  work,  or  bas-reliefs 
of  gold,  some  of  the  most  striking  events  in  the  history  of  Theseus  and 
Minos.     Each  of  the  two  parts  of  the  door  was  divided  into  panels,  and 


002  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

erery  panel  was  adonied  with  one  of  thcse  designs;  those  on  one  sido 
represcnting  sccncs  in  Athcns,  those  on  the  othcr,  sccnes  in  Crcte.  His- 
torical  grouping,  both  in  bas-rcHef  and  painting,  was  as  niuch  distiiiguished 
in  Virgirs  tinie  by  unity  and  simphcity  of  design  as  now,  or  as  in  the  best 
pcriods  of  art;  and  in  the  Aeneid  Virgil  appears  uniformly  to  conceive  of 
works  of  art  according  to  the  standard  of  excellencc  which  had  bcen  at- 

taincd  in  liis  own  age. Lctnm ;  supply  erat. Adrogeo  *,  Greek  geni- 

tive ;  'hvZpwyioi,  from  'Av^pojfo^s.  Sce  Gr.  §  54 ;  Z.  §  y'2,  3.  Androgcos 
was  the  son  of  Miuos,  kiug  of  Crete,  and  when  on  a  visit  to  Athens,  was 
niurdered  by  the  Atheuians  through  envy  of  his  success  in  tlie  public  ganies. 
Minos  made  war  upon  the  Athcnians  and  compclled  them  to  sue  for  peacc, 
which  he  granted  on  condition  that  seven  of  their  young  mcn  and  scven  of 
thcir  maidens  should  be  sent  to  Crete  cvery  ycar  to  be  dcvoured  by  the 

Minotaur. Pocnas ',  ctx  a  2>enalty. 21.  Cecropidae;  the  Athenians  are 

so  called  from  Cecrops,  the  traditionary  founder  of  Athens. Misernm. 

See  Gr.  §  199,  R.  2 ;  Z.  §  360. Septena  ;  literally,  in  sevens ;  seven  of 

each  sex. 22.  Stat  nrua ;  the  lots  had  becn  drawn  from  the  urn  in  order 

to  dccide  who  among  the  Athenian  youth  should  be  the  victims ;  and  these 
witli  their  parents  and  fiicnds  wcre  rcprcsented  in  attitudes  expressive  of 

agony. 23.  Contra ;  o«  the  oppositc  side ;  that  is,  on  the  othcr  fold  or 

valve  of  the  door. 21.  Ilic;  on  the  side  of  the  door  just  mentioncd,  or 

in  Crete,  which  is  rcpresenteJ  on  thi",  sido. Crndelis  amor ;  cruel  pas- 

sion ;  because  cruclly  excited  by  Vcnus  in  thc  mind  of  Pasiphae.     But  some 

translate  crudelis,  unnatural,  monstrous. Taari  is  an  objective  genitive. 

Snpposta ;  for  supposita. Fnrto  rcfcrs  to  thc  artitice  of  Daedalus, 

who,  according  to  the  fable,  constructed  thc  image  of  a  cow,  in  which  Pasi- 

phae  concealcd  horsclf. 25.  Mixtnm  gcnns;  the  Minotaur,  or  progeny 

of  Pasiphae,  was  half  man  and  half  bull. 26.  Inest ;  is  carved  or  repre- 

scnted  on  the  door. Vcneris  monnmcnta  ncfandac ;  a  onemorial  of  un- 

natural  lust ;  monumenta  is  for  the  singular,  and  in  apposition  witli  Mino- 

tanrus. 27.  Ilie;  hcrc  (too);  on  tliis  samc  side  or  valve  of  the   door, 

wliere  tlie  above-dcscribed  scene  in  Crcte  is  rcprescnted,  is  also  anotlier 
scene  in  Crete ;  namely,  tlie  Atlienian  hero  Tliescus,  aftcr  slaying  the  Mino- 
taur,  tracing  his  way  out  of  thc  Labyriutli  by  tlie  guidance  of  a  throad 
prcpared  for  liim  by  Daedalus  at  thc  intcrccssion  of  tlie  i^rincoss  {rcj/ina') 
Ariadne,  daughtcr  of  Minos,  who  had  bccome  enamored  of  Thoscus.     Soc 

Classical  Dictionary,  on  Thcseus  and  Ariadne. Ille ;    ihat   (far-ianud.) 

Gr.   §   207,   R.  24;    Z.  §  701. Labor ;    claborate  st^-ucture. Dumns; 

gcnitivc. Error.     Comp.  t.  591. 28.  Kfginae;  princcss ;  as  i.  273. 

Tlius  tlicrc  were  rcprcscntcd  on  tlie  door  in  all,  two  scenes  at  Athcns  and 
two  in  Crete ;  the  liist  was  tlie  niurder  of  Androgcos,  tlie  sccond  thc  deliv- 
cring  up  of  tlie  fourtecn  Atlicnian  youtlis  to  bc  convoyed  to  Croto,  the 
third  Pasiphai  enaniorcd  of  thc  whito  bull  of  Neptunc,  the  fourlh  the  Laby- 
rintb,  80  representcd  as  to  show  tho  Minotaur  withiu  just  slain  by  Theseus, 


BOOK    SIXTH.  503 

and  the  latter  escaping  with  the  aid  of  the  thread.     Each  of  thesc  occupies 

a  separate  panel  on  the  door. Sed  eniai ;  hit,  (it  was  not  always  so, )/or. 

See  on  i.   19. 30.   Cacca  vestigia ;   Ms  uncei-tain  footsteps. MaguRin 

partem.     Comp.  ii.  6. 31.  Sineret  dolor;   had  grief  pcrmitted ;   on  the 

omission  of  si  see  Gr.  §  261,  R.  1 ;  Z.  §  '780 ;  on  the  imperfect  suhj.  for  the 

pluperfect  see  Gr.  §  261,  R.  5 ;  Z.  §  525. Icare.     See  above,  on  14. 

32.  Conatns  erat ;  supply  ille,  referring  to  Daedalus. 33,  31.  Qnin  pro- 

tenus  perlegcrent ;  indced  they  would  have  examined  all  the  ohjects  successively 
with  their  eyes.     Protenus  denotes  imiuterrupted  continuauce.      For  the 

tense,  see  above  on  31. Oninia  is  here  a  dissyllable,  om-nya. 35.  Una 

(cum  illo) ;  ivith  him. — —36.  Deiphcbe ;  the  name  here  given  to  the  Cu- 
maean  Sibyl.  She  ia  also  called  Amalthaea,  Herophile,  and  Demophile. 
For  a  more  particular  account  of  the  Cumaean  and  the  other  Sibyls,  see 
Classical  Dictionary,  or  Smith's  Dictionary  of  Biography  and  Mythology. 

Glanci ;  the  daughter  of  Glaucus.     Glaucus  was  a  marine  divinity  gifted 

with  prophecy.     For  the  genitive,  see  on  Hectoris,  iii.  319. 3T.  Ista; 

those  (that  you  are  surveying.)     The  pronoun  iste  properly  pertains  to  the 

person  addressed.     See  Gr.  §  207,  R.  25 ;  Z.  §  127. 38.  Intacto ;  un- 

touched ;  the  cattle  not  yet  brought  uuder  the  yoke ;  ;3o'es  dSfxi^Toi. 39. 

Bidentes.  Comp.  iv.  57.  Animals  are  bidentes  when  they  have  both  the 
upper  and  lower  rows  of  teeth  complete ;  this  happens  after  the  second 
year,  and  at  tliis  age  they  were  preferred  as  victims  for  the  aUar.  Sheep 
were  generally  selected,  but  not  unfrequently  cattle  and  swine  are  also 
meant  by  bidentes. — — II.  Alta  teaipla ;  the  lofty  shrines ;  not  the  temple 
of  ApoUo  on  the  suramit  of  the  Acropolis,  just  described  as  the  work  of 
Daedalus ;  but  the  sacred  grotto  of  the  Sibyl  excavated  in  the  aide  of  the 

hill.     Alta  is  explained  by  ingens  in  the  following  verse. 12.  This  verse 

by  our  punctuation  is  connected  closely  with  the  preceding,  thus  making 
latus  in  apposition  with  templa.  "VVhether  this  punctuation  be  adopted  or 
not,  Heyne,  Thiel,  and  other  excellent  commentators,  regard  latus,  antrum, 
and  templa,  all  as  referring  to  the  same  object,  the  SibyFs  oracular  cave. 

Enboicae  ;  the  rock  of  the  Acropohs  is  so  called  because  it  pertains  to 

the  Euboean  colony  of  Cumae, Ingens;  Thiel  joins  with  antrum.     The 

expression  cut  into  a  cave  resembles  in  form  curvatus  in  arcum,  iii.  533. 

13.  Aditns;  avenues ;  the  subterranean  galleries  mentioned  above  in  uote 
2;  at  the  inner  ends  of  which  are  doors,  ostia,  opening  into  the  antrum. 

Centnm ;  for  a  number  indefinitely  great. 41.  Tndc  ;  out  of  whicli ; 

whenever  the  Sibyl  has  entered. 15.  Ad  limen ;  to  the  threshold  of  tlie 

antrum,  or  place  of  the  oracle. Posccre  fata ;  to  demand  the  fates ;  to 

pray  for  responses,  which  are  revelations  of  the  fates. 16.  I>eas !  tho 

priestess,  while  before  the  entrance  {ante  fores)  of  the  interior  caveru  ia 

already  under  the  iufluence  of  the  god. 17.  Non  nnns;  did  not  remain 

the    same. 18.    Non   comtae  mansere;    ancient    soothsayers   wore   the 

hair  unbound,  and  hanging  loose  about  thc  head  ;  that  of  Dcyphobe   now 


504  NOTES    ON    TIIK    AENEID. 

becomes  disordcred.     See  on  iii.  370. 4».  Babie  ;  with  (prophetic) /rer^ 

2y. Major  videri ;  (she  was)  grcater  to  thc  vicir;  Htcrally,  ^f^-ea^cr  to  be 

seen;  thc  infinitive  dcpcndcnt  on  the  adjcctivc.  This  is  Wagiier'8  inter- 
pretation,  whioh  is  sustained  by  Hor.  0.  i.  19,  7,  lubricus  anpki ;  0.  iv.  2, 

69,  niveus  videri.     Othcrs  rcgard  it  as  a  historical  itiSnitivc. 50.  Mortale. 

See  on  i.  328.     Her  whole  frame  expands,  and  lier  voice  assiinies  an  unnat- 

ural  elcvation  and  strength  of  tone. 51.  Jam  propiore;    noic  nearcr ; 

already  felt,  though  not  yet  evcn  in  liis  grcatcst  power. Cessas  in  vota  ; 

do  you  delay  to  bcgin  your  voios  and prayers?     Tliiei  and  Gossrau  supply  ire 

or  descendere  after  cessas. 53.  Attonitac ;  the  house  (or  eavcrn)  is  pcr- 

sonified,  as  being  awestruck  and  speechlcss,  Hke  a  human  being,  in  conse- 
quence  of  the  presence  of  the  god.  Only  the  vows  and  prayers  of  Aeneas 
will  suffice  to  impart  again  a  voice  to  the  hushed  abode.     Comp.  Lucan,  ii. 

21:  sic  fiinere  primo  attonitae  tacuere  domus.    Ladewig. 57.  Qni  direxti 

{direxisti);  Apollo,  as  the  patron  of  archcry,  gave  Paris  thc  skiil  to  hit 
Achillcs  (Aeacidcs)  in  the  hcel,  the  only  point  whcre  hc  was  vuhierable. 

58.  In ;  the  prcposition  sub  is  phaced  in  hke  manncr  after  its  noun  in 

G.  iv.  333 :  thalamo  sub  fluminis  alti% Obenntia  ;  xmshing ;  ohire  also 

governs  the  accusativc  in  x.  483. 59.  Dnee  tc  ;  thou  beinr/  lcader  ;  tindcr 

thy  ynidance ;  because  it  was  the  rcsponse  of  ApoUo  at  Delos,  iii.  154  sq., 
which  lcd  him  to  undcrtake  his  voyage,  first  to  Crete  and  finally  to  Hespe- 

ria. Penitns  repostas  ;  far  remote,  or  far  inland.     He  did  not  actually 

visit  the  MassyH  and  the  shores  of  the  Syrtes,  but  Carthagc,  near  by  them. 

GO.  Praetenta  ;  bordcring  upon ;  followed  by  the  dative,  as  in  iii.  692. 

61.  Jani  tandem  prendimns ;  now  at  hngth  we  grasp ;  the  significance 

of  thc  expression  ia  shown  the  more  distinctly  hy  fugientis ;  Italy  seekiug 
as  it  were  to  elude  our  grasp  we  have  at  last  overtaken.     Comp.  v.  629. 

62.  Hae,  etc. ;  thns  far  let  Trojan  fortunc  have  pmrsued  us ;  and  let 

that  be  cnougli  of  ill  fortune  to  satisfy  the  hostile  gods.     For  the  perfect 

subj.  see  Gr.  §  200,  R.  6  ;  Z.  §  529. 63.  Jam  fas  cst ;  it  is  now  right ;  it 

cannot  be  opposcd  now  to  the  divine  dccrces,  evcn  that  you,  (Juno,  Mi- 

ncrva,  &c.,)  should  sparc  the  Trojan  race. 66.  Vcntnri ;  for  thc  gcnit. 

see  Gr.  §  213,  K.  1 ;  Z.  §  436. Non  indcbita  ;  supply  mihi ;  duc  to  me. 

6T.  Fatis;  6y,  or  according  to,  myfatcs.     See  i.  205. Da  considcre; 

the  pricstess  or  prophetess  can  givc  or  grant  this  object  iu  so  far  as.  she  can 
inform  them  how  to  secure  it.     Comp.  iii.  400,  and  similar  languagc  in  re- 

gard  to  ApoIIo  as  a  prophct,  iii.  85. 68.  Agitata  nnmina;  persccutcd  d!- 

vinitics ;  tossed  to  and  fro;  added  by  cpcxcgcsis  to  dcos  crrantcs. 69, 

70.  Thcre  is  pcrhaps  an  allusion  hore  to  thc  templc  of  Apollo  crcctcd  by 
Aiigustus  on  the  Palatinc,  in  whicli  hc  placcd  a  sjilcndid  statuc  of  the  god, 
betwcon  the  statucs  of  Latona  and  Diana.     At  the  samc  timc  also  were  cele- 

brutcd  the  ludi  Apollinares. 71.  Te  qnuqne ;  this  vow  to  tho  Sibyl  to 

coiisccratc  sacrcd  arcana  in  the  future  kingdom  of  Aencas  for  the  prcserva- 
tion  of  hcr  oracles  was  fuIfiUed  in  thc  history  of  thc  so-called  Sibyllinc  booka 


BOOK    SIXTH.  505 

or  fates.  These  were  at  first  in  the  time  of  the  Tarquins  depositcd  in  the 
Capitol ;  but  after  the  burning  of  the  Capitol  in  the  time  of  Sulla,  B.  C.  82, 
a  new  collection  of  Sibylline  oracles  was  made  by  Augustus,  aud  deposited 
in  the  temple  of  Apollo  above  mentioned  in  two  cases  at  the  foot  of  the 

statue. Pcuetralia;  sacred  shrines ;  i.  e.  archives  for  the  preservation  of 

the  books  of  the  Sibyl. T4.  Alma ;  kind  prophetess. Viros ;  at  first 

two,  afterwards  ten,'and  finally  fifteen  men  {Quindecemviri  Sacrorum)  were 

appointed  to  the  custody  of  the  Sibylline  books. 16.  Ipsa  canas.    Comp, 

iii.  457. 71.  Pkocbi  uondnm  paticns  ;  not  yet  yielding  to  Apollo.     Divine- 

inspiration  is  too  much  for  liuman  weakncss  at  first  to  sustain,  and  her  na- 
ture  instinctively  struggles  against  the  influence.  The  prophetess  thus  re- 
sisting  is  compared  in  this  metaphorical  passage  to  au  untamed  horse,  which 
resists  the  efiforts  of  the  rider  to  subdue  his  fierceness.— Immaais  ;  wild; 

for  the  adverb  immaniter  ;  join  with  bacchatur  ;  she  raves  wildly. 18.  Si; 

elliptical  and  interrogative,  as  in  i.  181 ;  whether  she  may,  &c. 19.  ExcHS- 

sisse ;  the  perfect  injinitive  is  not  used  here  merely  for  the  present,  a  usage 
which  is  occasionally  met  with  in  poetry,  but  it  denotes  the  instant  comple- 
tion  of  the  action ;  she  desires  to  shake  off  the  god  at  once ;  to  have  done 

with  the  terrible  influencc,  too  powerful  to  be  endured. 80.  Fingit  pre- 

mendo  ;  forms  h^r  to  his  will  by  curbing.  Applicd  to  the  horse,  fatigare  is 
to  cxhaust  by  much  exercise,  domare,  to  break,  Jingere,  to  train,  and  premerc, 

to  bridle  or  curb. 81,  82.  The  priestess  and  Aeneas  are  in  the  cavern,  in 

antro,  in  the  general  sense  of  the  terra;  that  is,  in  the  excavated  passage 
ways  under  the  hill ;  but  not  in  the  inner  grotto  or  place  of  the  oracle.  But 
while  they  stand  before  the  threshold,  ante  fores,  and  after  Aeneas  has 
made  his  prayer,  the  doors  of  the  inner  cavern  spontaneously  open,  and  the 
Sibyl  rushes  in,  leaving  Aeneas  on  the  outside;her  voice  is  then  immedi- 

atcly  heard  from  within  giving  utterance  to  prophecies. 84.   Tcrrac ; 

supply  pericula  as  the  governing  noun.     Many  editions  have  terra  in  the 

ablative. Regna  Layini ;  the  kingdom  to  be  established  by  Aeneas,  of 

which  Lavinium  is  destined  to  bc  the  chief  city. 86.  Scd — TOlcnt ;  but 

they  will  also  wish  not  to  have  come, Bclla,  horrida  bclla,  cerno.     Like 

the  secr's  vision  in  Campbell : 

"A  fleld  of  thc  doad  rushes  red  on  my  Bight." 

——89.  AUuS  Acbilles ;  this  other  Achilles  is  Turnus,  who  is  already  being 

raised  up  ^y  the  fates  in  Latium  to  resist  the  Trojans. Latio  partns  is 

translated  by  some  editors,  obtained  for  Latium;  by  others,  raised  up  in 
Latium.  The  latter,  with  Latio  in  the  ablative,  appears  to  be  the  more 
natural.  Forbiger  understands  by  Lalio  the  new  realm  to  be  established  by 
^.eneas  in  Latium.     To  or  against  this  Trojan  Latium  an  Achilles  is  already 

^-.aised  up,  just  as  Troy  had  also  its  Achillcs. ^90.  \atas — dea  ;  and  he  toe 

born  of  a  goddess.     Turnus  was  the  son  of  the  nymph  or  goddess  Yenilia. 
See  X.  1G.     Achillcs  was  the  son  of  the  nereld  Thctis.     For  et  ipse,  sec  Gr 
22 


506  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

§  207,  R.  27,  (b);   Z.  g  C98. Nec — aberit;    nor  shall  Juno,   (always) 

haunting  the  Trojans,  anyichere  be  abscnt.     Teucris  addita ;  having  atiaclied 

hersclf  (in  hatred)  to  the  Trojans;  sticking  to  them. 91,  92.  Qnnin — 

nrbeSj  at  which  time  (or,  and  then")  what  tribes  of  the  IfaliaTis,  or  what  cities 
will  1/ou,  a  suppliaiit  in  needy  comlition,  not  havc  imjjlorcd  (for  aid) !    Comp. 

viii.  126  sqq. 93.  ConJDX;  Zavinia,  tlie  daughtcr  of  Latinus,  who  had 

promiscd  hcr  in  niarriage  to  Turnus,  but  on  the  arrival  of  Aeneas  violated 
that  promisc  in  order  to  espouse  her  to  Acneas,  and  thus  brought  about  the 

war. Hospita  Tencris ;  a  stranger  {alien,  or  of  a  land  foreign)  to  thc  Tro- 

jans ;  just  as  had  bccn  the  case  with  Helen,  who  had  been  in  like  maiiner 

the  cause  of  the  war  against  Troy. 95.  Coutra  andeutior  ito ;  oppose 

them.  (thc)  7nore  boldly. 96.  Qnani ;  iav  qiiantum ;  so  much  as  your  con- 

dition  wi/l  suffer  you. ^9T.  Graia  nrbe ;   Aeneas  found  his  first  ally  in 

Evandcr,  a  Grecian  prince  who  had  fornicd  a  httle  scttlemcnt,  callcd  Pal- 

lanteum,  on  what  was  afterwards  namcd  thc  Pallatine  hill  at  Romc. 99. 

norrenda^  wbages  ;  the  dread  mysteries ;  the  involvcd  and  ambiguous  uttcr- 

anccs  of  oracles, 100.  Ea  frena;  suchreins  (i.  c.  such  influences  as  to 

make  hcr  prophecy  thus)  does  Apollo  hold  over  her  in  Iver  frenzy,  and  (such) 
spurs  does  he  turn  under  the  breast.     Thus  the  mctaphor  in  77-80  is  rcsumed 

and  complcfcd. 103.  Rabida  ora;  frenzied  lips.     Comp.  abovc,  80. 

104.  Mi ;  for  mihi.    Gr.  §  133,  K.  1 ;  Z.  §  131,  note. 105.  Praecepi  at- 

qnc  animo  peregi ;  I  have  understood  beforchand  and  (already)  surveyed  in 
thought ;  hc  has  bccn  led  to  anticipatc  all  hardships  by  the  revclations  of 

Hclcnus  and  Anchises;  iii.  441,  v.  730. 106.  Qnando;  since ;   as  in  i. 

261. 107.    Palns  Achcronte  rcfnso ;    the  lake  (rising)  from  overflowing 

Acheron  ;  the  ablative  dcnotes^motion  from.  The  lake  alluded  to  is  proba- 
bly  that  called  in  ancient  times  Acherusia  palus,  and  at  present  Lakc  Fusa- 
ro,  situated  between  Cumae  and  Miscnum.  Its  waters  were  supposed  to 
rise  up  from  the  river  Acheron  in  the  lower  world.     It  is  secn  in  the  wood- 

cut  at  the  hcad  of  this  book  in  the  distancc  on  the  left. 109.  Contingat ; 

ht  it   be  my  lot ;    suffer  me. 114.  IUT.alidos ;  (tliougli)  /<r(Wr. Htra 

sortem  ;  for  the  proper  lot  of  old  age  is  quict  and  ease. 110.  Maiidata 

dabat.     Sce  v.  731  sq. 117.  Potes  omnia  ;  you  have  all  powcr ;  that  is, 

eo  fur  as  the  object  of  my  prcscnt  petition  is  conccrned ;  for  you  control  the 
Avcrnian  entrancc  to  Hadcs.     Omnia  is  a  limiting  accusativc,  denoting  in 

rcspect  to.     Sce  on  guid,  iii.  56. 118.  Ilccate.     Sce  above,  on  13. 

Aveniis ;  here  adjectivciy. 119.  Sipotnit;  this,  and  the  following  con- 

ditional  clauso,  are  connccted  by  our  punctuation  with  miserere  as  the  joro/a- 
tis;  havc  pily  (and  euffer  mc  aiso  to  dcsccnd)  if  Orpheus — if  Pollur  co^d, 
&c.  But  Thiel  and  others  prefer  to  make  et  mi  genus,  ctc,  the  apodosis; 
thus :  if  they  had  such  powcr  or  such  a  privilege,  bccause  thcy  wcre  divine, 
I  also  am  of  divinc  parcntage,  and  am  thcreforc  cntitled  to  the  samc  privi- 

lcge. 121.  Of  tiic  twin  sons  of  Lcda,  Poliux  was  the  son  of  Jupitcr,  and 

Castor  son  of  Tyndarus  ;  so  thftt  quc  was  mortal,  tlie  othcr  imniortal.     But 


BOOK    SIXTH.         .  507 

when  Castor  died,  the  love  of  Pollux  led  hin?  to  share  his  immortality  with 
his  brother  by  descending  every  other  day  to  the  lower  world,  and  allowing 

Castor  to  dwell  during  the  same  day  with  the  gods  in  Olynipus. 122. 

Viani.     Gr.  §  232,  (1);  Z.  §  38-4. Thcsea ;  Theseus  descended  with  hia 

friend  Pirithous  into  Hades  in  order  to  seize  and  carry  away  Proserpine. 

123.  ilciden;  Hercules;    so  called  from  liis  grandfather,  Alccus. 

124.  Arasqnc  tcnebat.     See  on  iv.  219. 126.  Desccnsns  Averno  •,  the  dc' 

scent  into  Hades;  Avernus  is  put  here  for  the  lower  world,  to  which  it  leads, 

and  the  daiive  case  is  substituted  for  in  Avernum.     See  on  i.  6. 128. 

Snpcras  ad  anras  ;  to  the  upper  air  ;  to  this  world  of  ours,  above  the  regions 
of  the  dead.  "  Those  who  dwell  in  the  lower  world  describe  the  world 
above  with  the  same  expressions  which  the  dwellers  upon  the  earth  employ 
in  spealiing  of  the  regions  of  light  and  of  heaven."     Ladewig.     Comp.  be- 

low,  436,  481,  568,  719. 129.  Pauci,  etc. ;  a  few  (only)  sons  of  the  gods, 

tchom  propitious  Jupiter  has  loved,  &c. Acquns;  kind.     Comp.  i.  479, 

C6S.  The  descent  to  Hades  is  easy  and  opcn  to  all ;  in  the  natural  order 
of  things  mortals  are  continually  thronging  to  the  lower  world ;  but  only  a 
gifted  few,  men  of  divine  birth  and  character,  are  permitted  both  to  descend 
and  return  again,  as  did  Hercules ;  to  achieve  this  return  from  Hades,  is  the 
work  of  heroes,  especially  such  as  are  not  destined  to  dwell  in  the  lower 

world,  but  with  the  gods  above.     And  such  is  Aeneas. 131.  Tenent  om- 

nia,.  etc. ;  woods  ocmpy  the  whole  region  between,  (i.  e.  between  the  upper  and 
lower  world,)  and  Cocytiis  with  his  dark  winding  channel  siirrounds  (the 
«ibodes  of  the  dead.)  Cocytics,  Styx,  and  Acheron,  are  used  indifferently  to 
deuote  the  waters  which  are  supposed  to  flow  around  Hadcs.  More  strictly 
they  are  described  as  branches  or  parts  of  one  great  streara ;  comp.  below, 
295.  The  forest  and  the  rivcr  intcrpose  an  obstacle  to  thc  return  of  those 
who  desccnd  to  the  lower  world,  for  it  is  contrary  to  the  divine  law  that 
they  should  be  recrossed.  AII  pass  them  easily  once,  that  is,  towards  the 
side  of  the  dead ;  but  only  such  as  Orpheus  and  a  few  heroes  can  sail  back 

across  the  Styx. 133.  Qnod  si ;  however  if;  but  if. Mentl  {esf);  your 

mindhas.    For  the  infinitive  aftcr  amor,  enpido,  see  on  ii.  10. 13-1.  Bls; 

comp.  Odys.  xii.  22,  Sio-Sovcef;  once  now,  and  again  after  death ;  this  is 
said  on  the  supposition  that  Aeneas  will  die  like  other  men ;  for  the  promise 

of  his  deification  is  not  yet  revealed  to  him,  or  known  to  the  Sibyl. 137. 

Anreus — Timine  ;  goldcn  both  in  rcspect  to  its  leaves  and  its  limber  stem,  (or 
wood.)     Gr.  §  250.     It  is  not  of  the  same  substance  as  the  tree  in  which  it 

is  concealed,  but  like  a  parasite  misletoe  or  moss. 138.  Jnnoni  infernae ; 

to  ihe  Juno  of  the  lower  world ;  Proserpine.     Comp.  iv.  638. Dictns  Sil- 

cer  ;    consea-ated. Omnis;    wlioUy,   entlrely. 110..  Scd  ;    notwithstand- 

ing  the  great  difficidty  there  must  be  in  detecting  the  hidden  branch,  still  it 

is  indispensable. 141.    Qui ;    the  indefinite  any  one ;   in  prose   cuiquam 

would  have  been  used  in  the  foregoing  clause,  and  the  pronoun  omitted 
here. Fetas ;    the  growih  ;   ihe  golden-leafed  branch. 142.  Hoc  snum 


508  NOTES    ON    TIIE    AENEID, 

manns  ;  i  her  appropriate  offeri^ig,  or  the  offering  to  her. ^FerH  ; 

ehc  has  dccrecd  that  those  who  undertakc  this  visit  to  the  lower  world 
should,  as  a  condition  of  success,  invarial)ly  carry  this  /^ift  to  hcr.     Sce  be- 

low,  636. 143.   Prlmo  ;   supply  ramo. 144.  Siniili — metallo  ;   a  twig 

of  the  same  metal  puts  forth  leaves. 145t  Alte  ;  with  your  cycs  directed 

high,  towards  the  branches. Ritc ;  properly ;  not  by  cutting,  birt  by 

pul/ing  off  with  the  hand ;  join  with  carpe.    '      146.  Seqnetnr ;  will  yicld. 

149.  Praeterwi.     Shc  has  now  givea  the  neccssary  directions  for  his 

dcsccnt  to  the  lower  ■world,  and  now  morcovcr  adds  of  hcr  own  accord  the 

information  following  in  regard  to  the  suddcn  death  of  Misenus. Tibi ; 

the  dativus  ethicus. 150.  Incestat ;  defilcs  ;  that  is,  in  a  religious  sense ; 

comp.  ii.  539 ;  the  contact,  sight,  or  presence  of  a  dead  body  renders  im- 

pure. Funere;  with  {hls)  cor^^se ;  so  fwmcs  is  uscd  also  in  ix.  491. 

151.  Consulta ;  rcspo7ises.     The  term  was  used  technically  of  the  legal  ad- 

vice  given  by  Roman  lawyers. 152.  Sedibns  snis ;  to  his  own  resting- 

plaee  ;  i.  e.  tbe  tomb;  thc  dativc  for  the  accusative  with  ad. 153.  Dnc; 

lead  (to  ^he  altar.) JVigras  pecndes.    Sec  on  v.  736. Prima;  «m  the 

first  place,  or  previoitsly  ;  the  adjective  substituted  for  the  adverb  primunu 
Comp.  i.  1. 154.  Sic;  thus  ;  i.  c.  by  first  maldng  such  a  sacrifice. 

1D6-235.  Aeneas  returns  to  the  shore,  and  diBcovers  that  the  dead  body  spoken  of 
by  the  Sibyl  is  that  of  Misonus.  "While  preparing  the  funcral  pile  ho  entcrs  the  forest 
and  is  led  by  the  doves  of  Vcnus  to  the  tree  on  which  thc  goldcn  bough  is  hid.  IIo 
plucks  the  branch  and  conveys  it  to  the  cavc  of  the  Sibyl. 

1G3.  Indigna ;  umvorthy ;  not  such  a  death  as  was  mcet  for  a  hero  so 

distinguishcd  in  war. 164.  Aeoliden  ;  the  son  of  Aeolus;  the  Aeolus  re- 

ferrcd  to  was  a  Trojan,  mentioned  in  xii.  542,  as  slain  in  battle  with  the 

Latins. 165.  Aere  ;  vAth  the  trumpet.     Comp.  iii.  240. Cierc,  aceeii- 

derc;  for  the  modc  sce  Gr.  §  270,  R.  1,  a. Cantu;  with  ihe  sound.     Ser- 

vius  says  that  Virgil  had  left  this  vcrsc  unfinishcd,  and  that  the  last  throc 
words  were  inserted  ex  tempore  when  he  was  rcading  the  Gth  Book  to  Au- 

giistas. 167.  Litno ;  ihc  lituus  was  crooked  at  the  cnd,  the  tuba  was 

straight.     Thc  fir.st  wus  uscd  by  the  Koman  cavalry,  the  othcr  by  thc  in- 

fantry. 170.  IVon  inferiora  SCCntos;  follouung  fortunes  not  inferior  ;  for 

Acneas  was  a  hcro  of  tlic  same  rank  as  Ilcctor,  with  whom  hc  is  placcd  side 

by  side  in  xi,  289. 171.  Pcrsonat  acquora ;  malrs  thc  watcrs  rcsound;  so 

jjcrsonare  is  iiscd,  bclow,  41S. Coiuiia  ;  lie  uscd  the  shell  on  this  occa- 

sion,  such  as  Triton  himself  cmi^loyod,  thus  showing  still  morc  daring  in 

compcting   with   hiin. 173.  Exceptuui.     Comp.  iii.   332. Si  credcrc 

di^uum ;  tliis  indicatcs  a  doubt  as  to  thc  truthfulncss  of  the  rcport. 

176.  Jussa  Sibyliac. .  See  abovc,  152. 177.  Aram  scpnlcrl ;  thealtarofa 

scj/u/rhrc ;  it  mcan.s  simply  tiic  funcral  pi/c,  tcrmcd  ht-low,  '115,  pyra. 

179.  Stabnla.     Coinp.  tccta,  abovc,  8. 182.  Montibns;  from  the  nioun- 

tains.     The  ad  iii  advolvunt  has  rcfercncc  to  thc  j>yrc. 183.  Primns; 

forcmost.     Comp.  i.  21. 181.  Acciugltur ;  litcrally,  is  girdcd  on  iciththa 


BOOK    SIXTH.  509 

same  implements ;  handles  the  same  weapons ;  referring  to  the  axe.' 185. 

Ipsc  TOlntat ;  while  engaged  in  common  with  the  others  in  forwarding  the 
preparations  for  the  funeral,  he  himself  personally  reverts  also  to  the  in- 
Btructions  of  the  Sibyl  concerning  the  golden  bough  concealed  in  the  heart 

of  the  forest. 186.  Forte  is  substituted  by  Wagner  for  the  more  usual 

reading,  voce,  which,  after  all,  is  perhaps  preferable. 187.  Si ;  if  only ; 

0  that ;  this  usage  of  si  without  the  interjection  is  very  rare.     Thiel. 

Arborc ;  onthetree. 188.  Qnando;  since ;  as  she  has  spoken  the  truth 

in  regard  to  Misenus,  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  her  truthfulness  in  regard  to 
the  virtvje  of  the  goldcn  bough,  and  the  importance  to  me  of  procuring  it. 

191.  Ipsa  sub  ora  ;  under  his  very  eyes;  so  that  they  could  not  fail  to 

attract  his  attention. Coclo,  for  de  coelo. 193.  Materaas ;  sacred  to 

his  mother ;  doves  as  well  as  swans  were  sacred  to  Venus. 195.  Pin- 

gnem ;  fertile ;  since  it  produces  such  a  bough. 197.  Vestigia  prcssit ; 

he  chccked  his  steps;  stopped  in  order  to  watch  the  first  signs  given  by  the 
birds.  Forbiger  remarks  that  premere  vestigia  must  be  distinguished  from 
premere  alicujus  vestigia,  which  means  to  walk  in  the  foot-prints  of  some 

one  going  before. 198.  Qnae  signa  ferant;  what  tokens  they  present; 

what  signs  by  which  he  may  be  led  to  the  wished-for  tree. 199.  Tantnm 

prodire ;  advanced  only  so  much  ;  the  historical  infinitive,  as  in  the  following 

verse. 200.  Posscnt;  Gr.  §  264,  5;  Z.  §  567;  the  subjunctive  denotes 

the  intention  of  the  birds. Acic  scrvare  ;  to  keep  in  sight. Seqncnti- 

um ;  of  those  following  ;  equivalent  to  any  one  folloioing.  We  must  suppose 
Aeneas,  after  having  stopped  a  moment,  to  have  walked  on  in  pursuit  of  the 

birds. 201.  Jlraveolcntis ;  pronounced  here  in  four  syllables,  gravyolen- 

tis. 203.  Sedibns,  etc. ;  they  alight  in  the  wished-for  place  on  the  tivofold 

tree ;  gemina  indicates  the  twofold  nature  of  the  tree ;  one  part  ordinary 
wood  and  foliage ;  the  other,  the  branch  and  leaves  of  gold.  Thus  Chiron, 
the  centaur,  is  caUed  geminus  in  Ovid,  Met.  ii.  630,  on  account  of  his  twofold 

nature ;  so  Triton  in  Stat.  Silv.  iii.  2,  3. Optatis  refers  to  the  wish  of 

Aeneas  to  discover  the  tree. 201.  Discolor;  varicgated;  the  gleaming 

of  the  gold  contrasyng  with  the  green  of  the  other  foUage. Aura ;  for 

splfndor,  radiance;  it  occurs  in  this  sense  in  writers  of  the  golden  and  sil- 
ver  age  nowhere  but  here.  Ladewig.— — 205.  Viscum ;  the  misletoe  is  a 
pai'asite  which  grows  on  various  kinds  of  trees,  as  oaks,  firs,  &c.,  penetrat- 
ing  with  its  roots  quite  deeply  into  the  trunk  of  the  foreign  tree,  {guod  non 
sua  seminat  arbor,)  and  has  in  winter  green  leaves,  though  the  bark  is  of 

yellowish  green. 206.  Scminat ;  produccs. 207.  Crocco  refers  to  the 

yellow-colored  bark  of  the  mislctoe  twigs. Fetu  ;  hranch,  or  growth. 

211.  Canctantcm;  not  actually  resisting,  for  this  would  bc  inconsistent  with 
the  words  of  the  Sibyl  in  146  ;  but  slow  to  yield  as  compared  with  the  ea- 

gerness  of  Aeneas  described  in  avidus. 214.  TJiedis  ;  with  pitchy  logs , 

referring  to  piceae  above,   180. 216.    Intexunt ;    it  was  customary  to 

cover  the  sides  of  the  pyre  with  dark  green  boughs. FeralCS ;  funereal. 


510  NOTES    ON   THE   AENEID. 

Thc  fumes  of  the  cypress  cotinteracted  the  unpleasant  odor  of  thc  burning 

body. 217.  Fnlgentibns  armls  ;  the  arms  and  clothing  of  the  dead  were 

bunicd  with  thc  corpse. 218.  l^ndautiu  refcrs  to  the  watcr  boiling  up  ia 

the  culdrou.     Conip.  vii.  463. 219.  Exiti^Ainnt ;  prepare.     Comp.  also  L 

178,702. 220.  Toro;  on  the(funeTa.])coiichylcctusfu7i€bi'is,on  which  the 

body  was  placcd  or  laid  in  state,  after  being  washed  and  anointed.  Then  in 
the  usual  ordcr  of  funeral  ceremonies  the  lamcntation  was  raised ;  Jit  gemi- 

tus;  but  the  order  is  not  observed  in  this  description  of  Tirgil. 221» 

Velamlna  nota ;    well-known  hahiliments ;  familiar  to  the  eyes  of  them  all. 

222.  Snbicre  fcretro;  took  up  the  bicr;  took  the  bier  upon  theij;  shoul- 

ders.     The  dative  is  not  the  usual  construction  ia  this  sense  of  subire.     See 

Gr.  §  23S,  (8),  note ;  comp.  iii.  113. 223.  Minlsterinm ;   in  apposition 

with  the  preceding  clause.     Comp.  ix.  53,  x.  311. More  parentnm;  aftcr 

the  custom  of  thcir  anccstors,  with  averted  faces  they  held  the  torch  directed  to 

the  foot  {of  the  pile),  aftcr  they  had  deposited  the  corpsc  tbcreon. 224. 

Congcsta;  contributcd;  brought  together ;  Gossrau  undcrstands  it  of  the 
gifts  made  by  every  individual,  according  to  his  ability;  tbe  participle, 

therefore,  must  be  rcferred  alilie  to  dona,  dapes,  and  crateres. 225.  Da- 

pcs  ;  the  victims}  Buch  being  also  burncd  on  the  funeral  pilc. 228.  Cado 

aheno  ;  in  the  hrome  urn.     Corynaeus  is  also  mentioned  in  ix.  571. 229. 

Ile  also  thrice  passed  around  the  assembly  with  pure  water.  He  sprinkled 
them  thrice  with  a  branch  of  olive  dipped  in  water.  This  was  the  lustratio, 
a  ceremonial  clcansing,  nccessary  to  remove  all  religious  impurity  supposed 
to  be  contracted  from  the  prescnce  of  a  dcad  body.  This  act  of  lustrating, 
or  purifying,  is  properly  expressed  by  circumfcrrc,  which  thus  acquires  a 
transitive  signification,  and  takes  the  accusative  of  the  persou  cleansed,  and 

the  ablative  of  that  with  which  the  action  is  performed. 230.  Fellcls ; 

fruitful.  The  wild  olive,  wild  pine,  and  non-fruitbearing  trees  are  called 
infelices.     The  laurel  was  generally  used  instcad  of  the  olive  for  the  lustra- 

tio. 231.  JV^OVissima  rcrba;  it  is  uncertain  whcther  the  rcference  hcre  is 

to  the  last  salutation,  vale,  vale,  vale,  addrcssed  to  the  dead,  or  to  the  last 
word  addressed  to  tbe  assemblj',  as  a  signal  for  retirin^:  Ilicct ;  but  most 

commcntators  adopt  the  formcr  interpretation.     See  on  iii.  GS. 232.  fn- 

gcnti  mole  sepnlcrnm ;  a  scpulchral  mound  of  vast  size. 233.  Sna  arma ; 

his  own  anns;  namciy,  both  thc  oar  and  trumpct,  thc  instruments  most  used 
by  him ;  and  not  warlikc  wcapons,  such  as  werc  placcd  on  the  funeral  pile 

of  othcr  soldicrs.    So  Heync  cxplaius  thc  words. 234.  Hllscnus  ;  thc  name 

of  the  lofty  promontory  which  fornis  thc  northwestcrn  point  of  the  bay  of 
Naples,  suggested  tlic  story  of  thc  deatli  and  burial  of  Miscnus  thero. 

230-2C3.  Aoncas  at  mulnight  mnkcs  tho  propcr  sacriflccs  propnratory  to  ontering 
npon  his  journcy  to  tho  lower  worUl.  At  sunriso  llccato  npproaches  ;  tho  cavern  of 
Avernus  opens,  aud  the  Sibyl  rushes  in  followcd  by  Aeueaa. 

236.  Praeccpta.    Scc  above,  153. 237.  Spelnnca;  not  the  grotto  of 


BOOK   SIXTH.  511 

the  oracle  under  the  Acropolis,  but,  a  cave  on  the  shore  of  Lake  Avernus,  a 
Bhort  distance  frora  Cumae.  In  Virgil's  time  two  excavations  or  tunnels 
were  made,  one  connecting  Cumae  with  Lake  Avernus,  and  another  extend- 
ing  from  the  same  lake  to  Baiae.  »  The  latter  is  now  often  visited  as  the 

Sibyl's  cave. 238.    Tuta;  guarded. 239.  Volantes  ;  flying  creatiira. 

242.     This  line  is  generally  regarded  as  an  intcrpolation. 243.  Ki- 

grantcs  terga;  with  hlack  bodies ;  for  the  accusative,  see  i.  228. 245. 

Carpens  setas  ;  she  plucks  some  of  the  hairs  from  the  forehead  to  throw  into 

the  lire  as  the  first  ofiering  to  Proserpine.     See  on  iv.  693. 247.  Voce ; 

emphatic ;  with  a  loud  voice.     Comp.  iv.  681,  xii.  638. Coeloqne  Erebo- 

que  ;  Hecate  was  identified  with  Luna  in  heaven,  and  sometimes  with  Pro- 
serpine  in  Hades ;  though  as  an  infernal  goddess  she  was  also  regarded  by 

many  of  the  aucients  as  a  separate  personage. 248.  Supponunt ;  when  a 

victim  was  ofiered  to  the  infernal  gods  his  head  was  bowed  to  the  ground, 

and  the  kuife  inserted  under  the  throat.- 250.  Matri  Eumenidnm ;  Night 

was  the  mother  of  the  furies,  and  her  sister  was  Earth,  or  Terra,  a  daughter 

of  Chaos. 252.  Stygio  regi ;  Pluto. — ^Kocturnas — aras ;  he  performs 

Bacrifices  in  the  night;  for  it  was  customary  to  make  ofi"erings  to  the  infer- 
nal  deities  by  night.     Inckoare  usually  means  to  hegin,  but  Servius  says  that 

as  a  ceremonial  term  it  is  used  merely  for  facere. 253.  Solida  viscera ; 

the  whole  of  tlic  flesh ;  all  parts  of  the  victim  excepting  the  skin.  See  on  i. 
211.     The  gods  below  required  the  whole  victim  in  sacrifice ;  that  is,  a 

holocaust. 254.    Super  is  separated  from  infundens  by  tme.us. 255. 

Primi — ortus  ;  towards  the  light  and  rising  of  tlie  earliest  sun  ;  at  the  first 

flush  of  day. 256,  257.  Juga  silvarum ;  the  wood-covered  summits. 

Canes ;  "  Stygian  hounds "  were  supposed  to  accompany  Hecate  and  the 
furies.  258.  Adventante  dea ;  when  the  goddess  apjiroached;  the  goddess 
Hecate  comes  in  auswer  to  their  prayers,  in  order  to  open  the  way  to  Hades. 
She  is  invisible,  but  the  howhng  of  her  attendant  dogs  announces  her  com- 

ing. Proeul  este  profani ;  this  is  the  sacred  formula  employed  on  solemn 

occasions  to  warn  away  the  uninitiated.  The  words  are  addressed  to  those 
of  the  Trojans  who  have  been  present  to  aid  in  slaying  and  burning  the  vic- 
tims.  See  248.  Aeneas  himself  is  rendered  acceptable,  and  consecrated,  as 
it  were,  by  the  possession  of  the  holy  branch ;  comp.  406 ;  he  is  not,  there- 

fore,  profanus. 260.  Vagina  eripe  ferrnm ;  Ulysses,  too,  0d}-8.  xi.  48, 

draws  his  sword  on  encountering  the  ghosts  of  the  dead  in  the  lower  world, 
but  it  is  to  preveut  them  from  drinking  the  blood  of  the  victims ;  wherea? 

Aeueas  is  immediatcly  to  encounter  frightful  monsters. 262.    Antro ; 

dative  for  in  antrum. 

264-294.  After  invoking  the  favor  of  the  deities,  whose  realms  he  is  about  to  do- 
Bcribe,  the  poet  enters  upon  this  new  and  ditlicult  part  of  his  work ;  the  narrative  ol 
his  hero'8  visit  to  Hades.  Aencas  first  passcs  througb  th«  vestibule,  and  is  cncoun 
tered  by  many  hideoua  forms. 

265.  Cliaos,  as  a  person,  is  sometimes  represented  as  tho  father  of  Night 


512  NOTES    ON    THE   AENEID. 

and  of  Erebus,  and  sometimes  as  a  deity  of  Hades. Plilogclhon.     Sec  be* 

low,  550,  551. 266.  Sit  nnniine  vcstro  ;  supply /as  mihi  from  tbe  forego- 

ingclause;  let  it  he  rlyJit  fvrmeviUhyour  coyt^ent. 269.  Vacn.is  5  cmptj/, 

bccause   unoccupiccl   by  maicrial  bodics. Innnia  rcgna  \  the  realms  of\ 

shadoirs. 270.    Sluligna  ;    unfriendly,    trcacherous. 273.      The   woes 

which  afTiict  mcn  in  various  ways  continnally  dcstroying  lifc,  and  conducting 
men  as  it  wcrc  to  the  lower  world,  arc  here  personified  as  shadowy  monsters, 
occupying  the  very  cntrance,  as  the  point  whcnce  they  can  most  casily  con- 

,  tinue  their  fatal  worli. 274.  Ultriccs  curac ;  avenging  cares ;  the  pangs 

of  conscience  caused  by  the  recollcction  of  misdeeds. 276.  Malcsuada ; 

crime-persuading ;  that  tempts  to  robbery,  &c. EgCStas  is  called  turpis, 

witli  reference  to  the  outward  appearance  of  the  poverty-striclven. ilS» 

Sopor;   Sleep ;   personificd  asthe  kinsman  or  brother  of  Death.      Comp. 

Ilom.  II.  xiv.  231. 279.  Gandia ;  tlie  guilty  joys  of  the  mind;    all  evil 

dcsires. Idvcrso  in  liminc  ;  on  the  thrcsliold  that  meets  you  after  passing 

through  the  vcstibule  just  dcscribcd  ;  that  is,  at  tlic  doorway  of  Ilades. 

280.  Fcrrei ;  prouounce  the  last  two  vowels  herc  as  a  diphthong.  The  Eu- 
menides  are  conceived  to  have  seats  at  the  entrance  of  Hadcs,  as  wcll  as  in 
Tartarus,  and  even  on  the  thrcshold  of  Jupiter's  palace.     See  xii.  8-49. 

281.  Vipcrcnni ;  the  hair  of  Discord,  like  that  of  thc  rurics,  and  of  the 

Gorgons,  was  cntwincd  with  snakcs.     See  page  568. 282.  In  mcdio ;  in 

ihe  midsi  of  the  vestibulc. 283.  VnlgO ;  everyivhere.     Comp.  iii.  643. 

284.  Hacrcnt  in  prose  would  have  been  in  the  same  construction  as  tenere  ; 

dependent  on  ferwii. 286.  Scyllae  ;   Scyllas ;   such  monsters  as  Scylla 

with  her  twofold  body ;  partly  like  a  fish  and  partly  like  a  human  being. 

287.  Ccntnmgeminns ;  the  hundred-handcd ;  the  tcrm  seems  to  be  used 
indefinitely.     Briarcus  or  Acgaeon  was  the  son  of  Ooelus  and  Terra.     He 

had  a  huudrcd  hands  and  fifty  heads. Bellna ;  the  beast  alluded  to  is  the 

Lernaean  hydra  killed  by  Ilercules. 288.   Horrcndnm ;   adverbially,  as 

ix.  732,  xii.  700.- — Stridcns;  join  with  hcllua. 289.  Tricorporis  ombrae ; 

the  giant  Geryon,  slain  by  Hercules  in  Gades,  (Cadiz,)  was  said  to  have 

three  bodies.     This  is  the  monster  referred  to. 292.  Tcnncs,  etc. ;  that 

thcy  as  ihin  ghosts  wiihoiit  a  hody,  &c.  For  the  modc  of  admoncat  and 
Irrnat,  comp.  i.  68,  and  notc. 

295-S3C.  Aencas  comes  to  the  bordcr  of  Achcron,  and  among  tho  throng  of  sh.tdes 
waiting  to  cross  ovcr  tho  river  in  tho  boat  of  Charon,  ho  discovors  Orontes. 

295.  Hinc  Tia;  from  hence  is  ihe  tray ;  i.  c.  from  the  thrcshold  just  de- 
scribed.  Thrce  rivers  surround  tho  abodes  of  the  dead;  Virgil  placcs  the 
Achcronfirst;  this  flows  into  the  second,  callcd  Cocytus;  the  third  is  thc 
Styx  ;  thc  Phlcgcthon  and  Lcthe  arc  scparate  from  the  others.    Sce  550  sq., 

and  705. 296,  297.     This  tonrvf,  mingled  with  slitne,  and  of  unfathoma- 

ble  dcpth,  boils  itp,  and  discharges  altits  sand  into  Cocytus. Cocyto;  da 

tive  for  mi  Cocylum. 298.  Cliaron  ;  for  somo  account  of  the  Stygiau  ler 

ryman  sce  Classical  Dictionary. 299.   Tcrribill  sqnalorc ;   of  frighfful 


BOOK   SIXTH.  513 

gqualor ;  limiting  ablative  after  Charon ;  some;  howcver,  joln  It  with  hor 

rendus. 300.  Stant  laniina  flamma  ;  his  eye-balls  (jlarc  with  flamc ;  mor€ 

literally,  stand  (fiUed)  witli,  fiame.  Comp,  xii.  408.  The  ablative  may  be 
referred  to  Gr.  §  245,  5.  According  to  Wagner  the  literal  translation  would 
be,  his  eyes  stand  Jixed  inflame  ;  they  are  fixed  and  fiery ;  stare  being  thus 

equivalent  to  riyere. 301.  Kodo^  by  a  knot ;  not  fastened  with  a  fibida 

or  clasp. 303.  Velisministrat  \  and  manages  (it)  icith  the  sails.     By  this 

interpretation,  velis  is  made  in  the  ablative  case.  Comp.  x.  218 ;  Val. 
Flac.  iii.  38 :  ipse  ratem  stcllisqiie  ministrat.  Others  niake  velis  the  dative 
after  ministrare,  as  a  verb  signifying  to  do  service  to,  to  attend  upon ;  i.  e. 

Charon  himself  does  this,  without  any  assistant. 304.  Scd  croda ;  but 

the  old  age  of  a  god  (is)  fresh  and  vigorous ;  a  green  old  age. 305. 

Ilither  to  the  bank  the  whole  streaming  multitude  ivas  hastening.  Some  join 
ad  ripas  with  effusa  ;  but  Forbiger  makes  the  noun  a  mere  repetition  of  the 
adverb  huc  in  a  more  definite  form.     Comp.  huc — caeeo  lateri,  ii.  18,  and 

hic — in  vasto  antro,  iii.  616.     Effusa;    as  in  v.  145. 306-308.     These 

verses  are  taken  froni  G.  iv.  ^t^—iYY. Magnanimnm ;   contracted  for 

magnanimorwn ;  this  is  the  only  adjective  which  Virgil  thus  contracts  ia 

the  genitive  plural.     Comp.  iii.  704. 309,  310.  Qnam  mnlta  ;  as  many  as 

the  leavcs  in  the  forests',  that  descending  fall  with  the  first  frost  of  autwnn. 

Lapsa,  (literally,  having  slipped,')  serves  as  an  inceptive  of  cadunt. 

Ad  tcrram  ;  towards  the  land. Gnrgitc  al)  alto  ;  from  the  dcep  rolling  sea. 

Migratory  birds  first  assemble  in  large  flocks  and  then  commence  their  an- 
nual  flight  together  to  the  ■warmer  regions,  or  sunny  lands,  {terris  aprieis.) 
313.  Stabant ;  fhey  (the  ghosts)  stood  besceching  fo  cross  the  chcmnel  first. 
Transmittere  is  often  intransitive,  as  here,  se  being  understood.  Comp.  iv. 
154.     The  infinitive  is  used  here  for  the  subjunctive  after  orantcs.     Gr. 

g  273,  2,  (b);  Z.  §  616. Cwsnm;  fov  fiicviwn. 311.  Ripae  ultericris 

amorc ;  tvith  strong  desire  of  fhe  bank  beyond;  for  that  was  their  place  of 

rest. 315.  Tristis;   stem,  or  gloomy. 316.  Snbmotcs  arcct;   removes 

andrepels.     See  on  i.  69. 318.  Qnid  vnlt?  what  means  this  thronging  io 

the  river  ? 320.  Linqnnnt ;  do  these  retire  from  the  shores  ?  according  to 

what  distinction  arc  thcse  driven  back,  while  those  pass  over. 321.  Olli. 

Comp.  i.  254. 324.  By  whose  divinify  the  gods  fear  to  swear  and  (then)  to 

break  the  oath.  Attevjurare  the  poets  sometimes  use  the  accusative  without 
2icr,  in  imitation  of  the  Greek  idiom.     Comp.  351,  xii.  197.     The  violation 

of  this  solemn  oath  subjected  thc  god  to  the  power  of  death. 325.  Hacc ; 

opposed  to  hi.     The  idea  that  the  unburied  dead  cannot  be  immediatcly 

conveycd  over  the  Styx  is  also  presentcd  in  Hom.  II.  xxiii.  71-74. 32T. 

JfCt  datnr  ;  nor  is  it  pcrmiitcd  (to  Charon."' 329.  Errant;  (the  unburied) 

waiider  a  hundred  years,  &c. 333.  Mortis  honorc  carcntes ;  dcprivcd  of 

the  honor  due  to  death;  that  is,  of  burial.     Moriis  is  an  objcctive  ^enitive. 

334.  Lcneaspim;  one  of  the  friends  of  Orontes.     Seo  i.  113. 335« 

8imnl  VCftos  ;  sailing  in  company  (with  Aeneas.) 
oo* 


514  NOTES    ON    THE   AENEID. 

S37-oS3.  Aencfis  mcets  with  the  shade  of  tho  pilot  Palinurus,  who  givcs  an  accoun 
of  his  fatc  aftcr  beiug  cast  into  the  sca  by  Somnus,  aud  begs  that  his  body  may  b» 
fouud  and  buricd,  or  that  ho  may  now  accompany  Aeneas  to  Elysium.  The  Siby' 
consolcs  him  with  the  promiso  that  his  rcraaius  shall  be  honorcd,  and  that  his  name 
Bhall  bc  given  to  tho  hmd  whcre  his  body  lies,  though  it  is  hnpossible  to  grant  his  seo- 
ond  rcquest. 

NoTK.— This  story  is  similar  to  that  of  Elpenor,  Odys.  xi.  51-SO. 
338.  Libyco  cnrsu  ;  07i  the  Libyan  voyage  ;  on  tbe  voyage  from  Africa  to 
Italy.     Lihyan  voyage  may  mean  eitlier  a  voyage  to  or  from  Libya,  or  a 

Toyage  on  tbe  Libyan  sca ;  the  context  miist  dctermine  tbe  sense. 339. 

Meiliis  clTasns  in  nudis  ;  plunged  into  the  mldst  of  the  sea. 343.  Namqne 

Diiiii  j  Aeneas  speaks  here  of  some  revelation  of  Apollo,  which  lias  not  been 

introduced  into  the  foregoing  narrative. 345,  346.  Fiuos  Ausouios ;  to 

the  Ausonian  country ;  for  the  aceusative,  sce  on  i.  2. 347.  Corliua  ;  the 

oracle.     See  on  iii.  92. 348.  Ncc  nie  dcns  aeqnore,  etc. ;  nor  dkl  n  god 

plunge  me  into  the  waters  ;  the  first  qucstion  of  Aeneas  is  answered  last.  It 
■was  not  a  god,  but  the  drowsiness  of  tbe  pilot,  at  least  so  far  as  be  hiraself 

is  aware,  which  caused  bim  to  fall  from  the  sbip. 351.  Praccipitans ;  in- 

transitivc,  as  in  ii.  9 ;  falling  headlong. Maria  aspera  juro ;  /  call  the 

rough  seas  to  witness  ;  an  appropriate  oath,  as  the  accident  liappened  on  the 
Eea.     In  xii.  197,  tbe  sea  is  also  invokcd  in  a  solemn  oatli.     For  tbe  accusa- 

tive,  sce  above  on  324. 352.  Pro  me;  for  mysclf.     Comp.  xii.  48. 

353.  Spoliata  arniis;  dcprived  of  %(•>  arms.  What  particular  weapons  or 
equipments  are  meant  by  arma  must  be  detcrmiued  by  the  context.     Herc 

tbe  refcrence  is  to  the  helm. Excnssa  magistro ;  rohbcd  of  its  pilot ;  tbe 

regular  form  would  bave  been  excusso  magistro.     Comp.  i.  115. 354. 

Deficcrct ;  should  sinh  ;  fail  to  sustaiu  the  storms. Uudis  ;  ablative  abso- 

lute. 355.   ilibernas  ;  tempestuous. 356.  Violcutus  aqua ;  rough,  or 

raging,  on  thc  sca. Qaarto ;  the  events,  therefore,  which  bave  becn  dc- 

scribed  in  the  preceding  part  of  thc  sixth  book  have  occupied  several  days. 

357.  Snblimis  ab  unda  ;  high  from  the  top  of  the  wave;  he  bad  floated 

011  the  rudder,  and  '■'■  puppis  parte  rcvulsa."    Sce  v.  858. 358.  Tuta  tenc- 

bam,  etc. ;  already  I  was  in  safety  (holding  places  wliicb  would  havc  becn 
safc)  unless  an  inliuman  trihe  had  attackcd,  kc. ;  for  this  forcible  usage  of 
the  indicativc  where  we  sbould  bave  expected  the  subjunctive,  scc  Gr.  g  259, 

R.  3,  (d);  Z.  §  519,  n.  1,  at  the  bcginning;  coinp.  viii.  522. 359.  Cum 

vcste ;  witb  words  denoting  articles  of  drcss,  or  objects  pertaining  to  the 
person,  the  prepositions  cum  and  in,  as  in  English  with  and  wt,  are  sometimes 
expressed,  even  whcn  thc  relation  of  meaiis  rathcr  than  that  of  manner  or 
accompanimcut  is  denoted  ;  weighcd  dotcn  in,  or  with,  my  drenched  garmcnts, 

3C0.  Capita  aspera  niontis  ;   the  projccting  poiuts  of  a  cliff. 3til. 

Praedam  ignara  pntasset ;  and  erring  hud  supposcd  mc  a  booty  ;  taking  mc  to 

be  a  sbipwrecked  voyagcr  loadcd  wilh  all  tiic  valuablos  he  could  savo. • 

80?.  Vcrsaut ;  thc  winds  casl  me  ahout  on.  the  .shorc ;  Ihc  body  is  daslicd  to 
mid  fro  by  ibc  advaacing  aud  rcceviiug  waves.— — 3(>3.  Haod ;  wherrfore ; 


BOOK   SlXTH.  515 

literallj,  as  to  which.     See  on  ii.  141. 365.  Malis ;  these  woes  ;  the  sufifer 

ings  I  am  subjected  to  in  consequence  of  being  unburied. 365,  366» 

Terram  iujice ;  as  on  the  remains  of  Polydorus ;  see  iii.  63 ;  and  ilisenus, 

above,  232. 366.  Potes ;  you  can  do  it  by  sailing  back  to  Yelia. 

Velinos ;  this  word,  likc  Lavini,  above,  84,  is  used  by  anticipation ;  for  Ve- 
lia  was  not  then  in  existence,  and  not  until  the  sixth  century  before  Christ. 

367.  Diva  creatrix ;  thy  goddess  mother.'    Comp.  viii.  534. 369.  lu- 

nare;    for   navigare;    sail. 3T1.    la  morte   is   equivalent   to   rnoriuus. 

Comp.  below,  444.-^ 372.  Vates  ;  the  Sibyl. 374.  Tu  ;  the  pronoun  tu 

18  expressed  to  denote  surprise  or  indignation.     Gr.  §  209,  R.  1,  (b);  Z. 

§  693. Sevcrum ;   dreadful. 377.    Cape  dicta  mcmor ;   treasure  my 

voords  in  your  memory^  as  a  solace,  &c. 378.  Finitimi ;  the  inhabitants 

around;  i.  e.  the  Lucanians. Longe  latcqne  ;  throughouf  the  ivhole  region; 

join  the  adverbs  y^iih.  piahwit. 379.  Prodigiis  acti  coelestibns  ;  moved  by 

celcstial  omens.  There  was  a  tradition  that  the  Lucanians  were  visited  by  a 
pestilence  and  that  in  obeJJence  to  the  warning  of  an  oracle  they  made  ex- 

piatory  offerings  for  the  murder  of  Palinurus. 380.  Tamnlo  mittent ;  will 

bring  to  the  tomb. 381.  Acternnm  ;  the  cape  is  still  called  Punta  di  Pali- 

nuro. 382.  Parumpcr  ;  for  a  little  while  ;  then  to  return  again. 383. 

Cognomine  tcrra;  on  account  of  the  land  named  after  him;  cognomine  is 
the  ablative  of  the  adjective  cognominis,  agreeing  with  terra.  See  Gr. 
§  113,  exc.  1. 

384-425.  Oa  the  approach  of  Aeneas  Charon  warns  him  to  keep  aloof  from  tho 
bank  ;  but  at  length,  appeased  by  the  words  of  the  Sibyl  and  by  the  eight  of  the  golden 
branch,  he  takes  them  on  board  and  conveys  thcm  over  the  fctyx.  On  landing  they 
immediately  come  to  tho  portal  where  Cerberus  keeps  watch. 

385.  Prospcxit  al»  Ollda ;  wlien  he  viewed  them  from  the  wave ;  that  is, 

frora  the  midst  of  the  stream. 388.  Armatus ;  Charou  is  alarmed  at  the 

appearance  of  aa  armed  man  proposing  to  cross  the  Styx,  for  he  remembers 
the  disturbance  formerly  occasioncd  iu  Hades  by  the  visit  of  Hercules,  The- 

seus,  and  Pirithoiis. 389.  Fare  jam  istinc  ;  speak  even  there  where  you  ar« 

now, 392.  Kee  sum  lactatns.     When  Hercules  went  into  the  lowor  world 

to  bring  up  Ccrberus,  Charon,  being  terrified,  carried  him  at  once  over  the 
Styx,  aud  aa  a  punishment  was  imprisoned  a  year  by  the  command  of  Pluto. 

Enntem  ;  for  advenientem. 393.  Acccpissc  lacu ;  that  I  received  him 

on  the  water.     Comp.  i.  685. 39i.  Dis  geniti.     Theseus  was  a  son  of 

Neptune,  Pirithoiis  of  Jupiter. 395.  Cnstodem ;  the  dog,  Cerberus. 

396.  A  solio  rcgis.     When  nercules  appeared  Cerberus  fled  for  refuge  to 

the  throne  of  Pluto. 397.  Dominam  ;  thequeen;  Proserpine. Ditis; 

join  with  Thalamo. 398.  Amphrysla ;  the  Amphrysian  prophetess ;  she 

is  so  called  as  the  servant  of  ApoIIo,  because  one  of  his  titles  was  Amphry- 
sius,     He  was  so  ntvmcd  as  he  had  kcpt  the  oxcn  of  king  Admetus,  ucar  the 

river  Amphrysus. 399.  Absistc  moTCri ;  cease  to  be  moved. 100.  Licet ; 

%t  is  j)erniitted;  i.  c.  so  far  as  we  are  concerned.    Aeneas  has  no  such  vio- 


516 


NOTES   ON    THE    AENEID. 


lent  purpose  as  tbc  hcroes  )'ou  have  mcntioncd ;  Cerbcnis  and  Proserpine 

may  remain  forevcr  unniolestcd. 401.  Aeternain  ;  forever ;  the  adjcctive 

adverbially.     Comp.  288.     Bcforc  ^m-eai  supply  ?<# 402.  Pjltrni;  of  het 

uncle ;  for  Proscrpine  was  the  daughter  of  Jupiter,  brother  of  Pluto,  her 

husband, Ser^et  limen ;  mai/  keep  thc  mansion  ;  abide  in  the  roansion. 

This  was  the  duty  of  aa  exemplary  -wife. 105.  IniilgO  ;  regard,  considera- 

tion  ;  mental  image. 407.  Tamida  CX  ira  corda  residant ;  his  swollen  breast 

subsides  frmn  anger.     Some  translate  ex,  after,  but  there^  is  a  closer  connec- 
tion  here  than  merely  that  of  time.    See  Andrews'  Lat.  Lex.  article  "  ex,"  6. 

408.  Nec  plara  Lis;  «o?- (does  she  add)  more  to  these  things.  .  Others 

make  his  in  the  ablative  after  plura ; 
and  some  join  the  following  il/e  to  this 

clause  as  the  subject. 409.  Fatalis 

Tirgae ;  the  branch  of  Fate  ;  bccause 
the  branch  servcd  as  the  token  that 
he  had  been  called  by  the  fatcs  to 

Ilades.  See  above,  1-iY. Longo  post 

tempore  visnm  ;  thcre  is  no  reason  for 
supposing  that  Herculcs  and  Thesc- 
us  were  the  last  who  had  prescnted 
^  the  golden  bough,  or  indced  that 
°  thcy  presented  it  at  all  when  making 
S  Iheir  forced  entrance  into  Elysium. 
S  For  the  ablative,  see  Gr.  §  253,  R.  1 ; 

"^  Z.  §  4YC. 410.  Cernleam;  Kvaveov, 

§  dark ;    sombre.      Comp.    above,    303, 

bo  where  it  is  termed  ferruqinca. 411. 

.5  Alias  animas ;  a  contractcd  form  of 
§  expression  for  alios,  quae  animae  fuc- 
g  runt.  Alius,  and  in  Greek  &\\of,  are 
«  oftcn  thus  used ;  as,  Cic.  in  Vcrr.  v. 
^  10,  27,  vcris  initium  non  a  Favonio 

ncque    ab    alio    astra. Jnga ;     for 

transtra;  benches. 412.  Foros;  the 

whole   interior  of  the   boat.      Laxat 

foros;  clears  thc  boat. iI3.  Ingcu- 

tem ;  the  form  of  thc  hero  is  great 
and  pouderous,  especially  in  contrast 
witli  the  frail  struct\ire  of  the  boat, 

and  its  ordinary  passengcrs. 413) 

414.  Cymba  sutilis  ;  the  stitchcd  boat; 
thc  boat  was  madc  eithcr  of  rcedg 
Bewcd  togothcr,  or  of  rccds  fastencd  and  covercd  ovcr  witb  hidcs  which 
wwe  eewed  togother. Palndm;  (or  p^ihidis  aquam. 415.  Incolnmis  ; 


BOOK   SIXTH.  517 

(It)  uninjured ;  refemng  to  the  boat ;  some  vead  incolumes. 416t  Informl 

limo;  oji  the  formless  mud;  in  is  expressed  with  the  second  noun,  as  in  il. 

654. 41T.  Regna;  accusat.  after  personat.     Comp.  above,  171. Tri- 

fanci ;  Cerberus  is  represented  with  three  heads,  and  with  hair  about  his 

neck  composed  of  snakes. 418.  AdTCrso ;  see  on  adversa,  i.  166;  oppo- 

site  to  them  as  they  land. 420.  McUc  soporatam — offam  ;  a  cake  steeped 

in  honey  and  iii  soporijic  drugs  ;  thls  is  the  real  sense.  Soporatam  cannot 
strictly  apply  to  melle,  and  must  be  regarded  here  as  joined  with  it  by  a 
kind  of  zeugraa ;  in  strictncss  the  language  would  be  melle  imbutam  et  fru- 

gibus  medicatis  soporatam. 421.  Fanic.     Gr.  §  295,  exc.  1 ;  Z.  §  98. 

422.    Objectam ;   a  verb  preceding  is  repeated  in  the  participial  form  to 

denote  the  completion  of  the  action.     Gr.  §  214,  R.  3,  (b);  Z.  §  118. 

Immania  terga;  his  hvge  members. 423.  Toto — antro.    Comp.  iii.  631. 

484.  Occnpat ;  hastens  through;  hastens  to  pass  through  the  entrance 

before  he  shall  awake ;   hterally,   seizes  the  entrance. ^ScpnltO ;   supply 

somno.     Comp.  ii.  265. 

426-439.  Aeneas  having  passed  by  the  cave  of  Cerberus,  first  comes  to  the  abode  ot 
those  who  have  died  in  iufancy,  and  of  those  who  have  been  put  to  death  under  false 
accusations  of  crime,  or  who  have  been  impelled  by  the  hardBhips  of  life  to  commit 
Buicide. 

427.  In  limine  primo  ;  at  the  very  threshold.  Haring  passed  through  the 
vestibule  where  the  watch-dog  lies,  he  now  enters  the  doorway  which  opens 

into  the  dwelling-place  of  the  dead. 430.  Damnati  mortis  ;  condemned  to 

death;  for  the  case,  see  Gr.  §  217,  R.  3  ;  Z.  §  447. 431.  Ncc  sine  sortc, 

etc.  The  customs  of  the  Roman,  not  of  the  Grecian  courts,  are  here  alluded 
to.  Minos  as  qnaesitor,  praetor,  or  prcsiding  ofEcer  of  the  court,  assigns 
judges,  or  jurors,  (Judices,)  to  decide  on  the  case  of  each  individual  spirit. 
These  jurors  he  appoints  by  drawing  lots,  inscribed  with  the  names  of  thOse 
entitled  to  be  judges,  from  an  urn  {movet  urnam.')     Hencc  without  lot,  sine 

sorte,  and  without  a  judge  or  juror,  sine  judice,  are  here  synonymous. 

432,  433.  Silentnm  {silentium) — vocat — dlseit ;  he  both  summons  the  assembly 
of  the  silent  (shades)  and  investigates  their  lives  and  their  transgressions ; 
that  is,  it  is  his  prerogative  to  summon  them  before  the  court  and  to  inves- 
tigate  and  decide  eaeh  case  according  to  the  method  of  procedure  above 
explained.  The  Greeks,  however,  supposed  Minos,  Rhadamanthus,  and 
Aeiicus,  to  constitute  one  tribunal,  acting,  of  course,  without  the  interven- 

tion  of  jurors. 435.  Pepercre  mann  ;  for  consciverunt  manu  sua ;  obtahiea 

or  broiight  upon  bg  their  oicn  hands. 436.  Aethcrc  in  alto.    See  above, 

on  128. 

440-476.  Aeneas  comes  nest  to  the  fields  of  mourning,  where  dwell  in  solitude  the 
shades  of  snch  aa  have  in  any  way  come  to  an  untimely  end  on  account  of  love.  Here 
he  meeta  Dido,  and  in  vain  tries  to  obtain  her  forgiveness. 

442.  Qnos;  thc  masculine,  because  both  sexcs  are  included. I43i 

Seereti;  apart;  secluded. Myrte^l ;   the  myrtle  being  pacred  to  Yenue, 


518  NOTES   ON    THE    AENEID. 

the  godclcss  of  love. 445.  Phaedram  ;  Phaedra,  the  wifc  of  Thcseu^ 

killed   herself,  because  hor  stcpson,  Ilippolytus,  refused  to  cntertain  het 

wickcd  passion. Procrim ;  Procris  was  a  daughter  of  Erectheus,  king  o£ 

Athens,  and  wife  of  Ccphahis,  king  of  Phocis.  Out  of  jealousy  she  con- 
cealed  herself  in  the  woods  to  watch  her  husband,  when  hunting,  and  waa 

thus  accidentally  killed  by  his  spear. ^Eriphjicn ;  Eriphylc,  the  wife  ol 

Amphiaraiis,  bcing  bribed  by  Polynices,  persuaded  her  husband  to  go  to 
the  Thcban  war,  though  as  a  prophet  he  foresaw  that  he  must  perish  there. 
Aftcrwards  his  son  Alcmaeon  murdered  his  raother  in  revenge.  A  story  of 
illicit  love  must  also  have  been  contained  in  her  history,  or  the  poet  would 

not  have  placed  her  here. 446.  Nilti  Tulncra  ;  wounds  reccived  from  hcr 

son.     Comp.  ii.  436,  vulncre  Ulixi. 44T.  Evadncn;  Evadne,  the  wife  of 

Capaneus,  oue  of  the  seven  heroes  who  marched  from  Argos  against  Thcbes, 
where  he  was  killcd  by  a  flash  of  lightning.     Evadne  perished  by  casting 

hcrself  through  love  and  despair  upon  his  funeral  pile. Pasiphaen.     See 

on  24.— — Laodamia ;  the  wife  of  Protesilaus,  the  first  Greek  slain  at  Troy. 
He  was  killed  by  the  spcar  of  Hector.  The  accounts  df  her  death  differ. 
One  says  that  she  cast  herself  into  the  fire  which  had  been  kindled  by 
command  of  her  father  Acastus  for  burning  the  image  of  her  husband. 
For  her  love  had  led  her  to  pay  divine  honors  to  an  image  made  ia  hig 

memory. 448.  Juvenis,  etc. ;  Caenis,  the  youth  referred  to,  had  won  the 

love  of  Neptune  by  hcr  beauty,  and  was  changed  by  his  power,  at  hcr  own 
requcst,  into  a  youth,  under  the  name  of  Caencus.  Thus  transformed  she 
was  aLso  made  invulnerable,  and  hence,  in  the  contest  of  the  Centaurs  and 
Lapithae,  in  which  Caeneus  was  cngaged,  the  Centaurs  cast  trees  upon  him 
until  thcir  ■weight  forced  his  body  into  the  earth.     In  Ilades  the  youth 

was  again  transformed  to  Caenis,  the  beautiful  girk 451.  Qnam,  accord- 

ing  to  our  punctuation,  is  governed  hy  juxta.     Translatc,  and  as  soon  as  the 

Trojan  hero  stood  ncar  to  her. 452,  453.    Umbram  obscnram.     Comp. 

above,  340. 453.  Primo  mense  ;  in  the  beginning  of  thc  (lunar)  moiith  ; 

at  thc  time  of  new  moon ;  whcn,  if  the  sky  is  partially  covered  with  clouds, 
the  small  crescent  is  casily  obscured,  and  oue  may  be  uncertain  whether  hc 
sees  it  or  not.  Ileyne  thiuks  the  comparison  is  takcn  from  Apollonius  Ilho- 
dius,  4,  12,  79,  80,  liis  rls  re  Vice  ^i/l  i]/xaTi  iJ.rivr)v  "H  X^tv  ij  ivorjffev  tVax^i^oi;- 

aav  iSio^ai. 456.  IVuntins ;  some  rcfer  this  term  to  the  light  of  the  fire; 

see  v.  2-7  ;  othcrs  to  the  message  of  Mercury,  iv.  6G1.  Both  arc  unsatisfac- 
tory.  Possibly  it  may  be  rcgardcd  as,  abovc,  343,  or  it  may  be  that  thc 
poet  dcsigned  in  revising  his  work  to  introduce  some  vision  or  revelation  in 

the  forogoing  narrative  which  should  harmouize  with  this  passagc. Er- 

go ;  likc  our  then  whcn  introducing  an  exclamatory  passage  which  confirma 
mournful  tidings.      Couip.  Hor.  0.   1,  24,  5,  Enco   Qninctilium  pcrpctutts 

sopor  urguct. 457.  Extinctam  (csstf);*  supply  <e.     The  infinitive  is  in  ap- 

position  with  nuntius. Extrcma  ;  dcath.     Sec  on  i.  21D. 459.  Sl  qna 

fidcs ;  if  ihcrc  is  any  (binding)  p/cdgc  in  (this)  lowcr  world — by  this  I  swcar. 


BOOK    SIXTH.  519 

He  knows  not  what  form  of  oath  may  satisfy  the  shades  of  the  dead.— — 
462.  Senta  sitn  ;  squalid  with  mould.  The  expression  appears  to  correspond 
to  Homer's  'AiSeu  S6fj.oi>  evpwevTa,  mouldy  house  of  Pluto.  Odys.  x.  512. 
Senta  means  rough,  like  a  place  neglected  and  covered  with  thorns  and 
brambles.  Comp.  Ter.  Eun.  2,  2,  5,  video  sentum,  squalidum,  aegrum,  annisy 
pannisque  ohsitum.  Situ  is  that  which  results  from  neglect :  Jilth,  mould, 
rust,  squalidness;  or,  applied  to  land,  the  state  of  being  overgrown  with 
weeds,  thorns,  and  brambles.     Some  translate  the  words,  rough  or  rugged 

through  neglect. 464.  Hnnc  tantnm  dolorem  ;  so  great  griefas  this ;  such 

as  to  cause  thy  suicide.     Comp.  iv.  419. 465.  Adspectn;  for  adspectui. 

466.  FatO  ;  fate  will  not  suffcr  him  to  see  her  again,  for  after  death  he 

cannot  expect  to  dwell  in  the  lugentes  campi. 467.  Ardcntem  and  tnentem 

agree  with  animum.  The  language,  animus  torva  tuens,  is  bold.  Her 
mind  shows  itself  in  her  angry  look ;  and  thus,  as  it  were,  it  is  her  mind 

which  sternly  surveys  him. Torva;  steridg.     See  on  midta,  i.  465. 

468.  Lenibat;  for  leniebat.     Gv.  §  162,  2 ;  Z.  §  162. Lacrimas;  some, 

with  Peerlkamp,  understand  this  of  the  tears  of  Dido ;  and  trahslate,  h6  en- 
deavored  to  call  forth  her  tears  ;  but  it  more  naturally  refers  to  Aeneas  him- 
self ;  for  hc  was  weeping.     See  above,  455,  and  below,  476 ;  comp.  iii.  344. 

469.     Comp.  i.  482. 471.  Stet  is  substltuted  for  sit ;  the  subject  is 

illa  understood ;  silex  in  the  predicate  ;  tha^i  if  she  stood  as  the  hard  flint, 

&c. Marpesia  ;  a  mountain  in  the  island  of  Paros  abounding  in  marble. 

473.  Illi,  the  dative  after  respondet,  is  substituted  for  a  genitive  after 

curis. 474.  Cnris  ;  the  immediate  dative  after  respondet ;  Sychaeus,  her 

former  husband,  participates  in  her  woes ;  literaUy,  responds  to  the  woes  to 

her. 475.  Casn  percnssns  iniqno  J  smitten  to  the  heart  by  her  imhappy 

fate;  referring  to  her  tragical  and  untimely  death. 

All-m.  Aeneas  comes  next  to  the  place  set  apart  for  the  abode  of  deceased  war- 
riora.  Here  he  sees  the  ghosts  of  many  Grecian  and  Trojan  heroes ;  among  these 
Deiphobus,  one  of  the  sons  of  Priam,  who  had  married  Helen  after  the  death  of  Paris. 
He  relates  to  Acneas  the  story  of  his  own  murder  by  the  hands  of  Monelaus,  who  waa 
introduced  into  his  chamber  by  Helen  on  the  night  of  the  sack  of  Troy. 

477.  Datnm  ;  permitted;  the  way  which  he  was  allowed  to  pursue  through 
the  infernal  regions  in  search  of  his  father.     Comp.  below,  datum  tempus, 

537. Molitnr ;  according  to  Heyne  this  verb  here  merely  means  pursues  ; 

others  prefer  to  understand  it  in  its  strict  etymological  sense,  toils  along,  in 
which  case  the  word  is  appropriate  to  Aeneas ;  since  to  him  the  darknesa 
and  roughuess  of  the  passage,  never  before  trodden,  render  the  way  difS- 

cult ;  but  the  Sibyl  is  acquainted  with  the  road. 477,  478.  Arva  tenebant 

nltima ;  they  were  now  arrived  at  the  farthest  fields  •  the  farthest  in  this  di- 
vision  of  Hades,  which  seems  to  terminate  with  the  wall  of  Tartarus,  and 

thc  entrance  to  Elysium. 479.  Tydeus,   Parthenopaeus,   and  Adrastus, 

were  among  the  seven  heroes  engaged  in  the  war  against  Thebcs. 481. 

A(i  supcros ;  among  those  in  the  upper  world ;  among  the  livinff.     See  on 


620  NOTES   ON    THE    AENEID. 

128.     Ad  is  here  in  the  scnse  of  apud. Cadnci ;  for  qui  cccidcrant.  • 

481.  Cereri  sacram  ;  consecrated  to  Ceres ;  Cereris  sacerdotem. 485.  Idae» 

nm;  Idaeus,  the  charioteer  of  Priani. Etiam ;  still;  licre  an  adverb  of 

time. 486.  FrcqucDtes ;  in  great  numbers. 488.  Conferre  gradam ;  to 

walk  side  btj  side. 491,  492.  Trepidarc,  TCrtcre,  tollere  ;    thc  liistorical 

infinit. 496,  497.  Ora,  manns,  tcmpora,  nares ;  Grcek  accusative.    See 

on  i.  228. 497.  Auribns ;   rohbed  of  thc  ears  torn  off.     Gr.  §  251  ;  Z. 

g  460. Inhoncsto  ;  Mdeous. 498.  Pavitantcm  ;  tronblinrf ;  fcaring  to 

address  Acneas,  becausc  he  felt  himself  to  bo  miserably  deformcd  and 

scarcely  recognizable. Tegentem  ;  for  tegere  volentem. 499.  Snpplicia ; 

his  pxmishments ;  used  hcre  not  with  the  notion  of  pcnalty,  but  to  express 

more  forcibly  the  inhuman  cruelty  of  the  mutilations  he  had  suffered. 

Ultro ;  Jirst ;  voluntarily ;  -without  waiting  to  be  spokcn  to  by  Delphobus. 

501.  Optayit ;  not  only  has  wished,  but  has  deliberately  choscn,  out  of 

various  forms  of  cruelty,  this  particular  one. 502.  Cni  tantnm,  etc. ;  to 

whom  has  so  much  power  over  thee  been  allowed?  Impersonal  verbs  often 
becomc  unipersonal,  when  the  subject  is  a  neuter  pronoun.     See  Madvjg, 

§  218,  a.  obs.  2. 502,  503.  Snprcma  noete;  on  the  last  night;  the  night 

of  thc  sack  of  Troy. 503.  Pelasgum  ;  for  Graecorum. 505.  Tnmnlum 

inancm.  Comp.  iii.  304.  This  cenotaph  to  Dcliphobus  must  have  been 
erected  by  Aencas  at  Rhoeteum,  ■vvhile  lie  was  prcparing  his  flcet  on  the 

coast  of  Troas,  at  Antandros. 506.  Mancs  TOCSlvi.     See  on  ii.  644,  and  iii. 

68. 507.  Nomen  ct  arma ;  thy  name  and  arms  keep  thc  ground  sacred. 

The  cenotaph  bears  the  name  {AriicpSfiou  ariixa)  and  arms  of  Delphobus,  aud 
these  secure  it  from  desecration,  while  tlicy  preserve  the  memory  of  the 

dcad.     Comp.  vii.  3. Te ;  thee  thysclf,  that  is,  thy  bodg,  I  could  not  bc- 

hold,  &c.     For  the  vowel  in  te  unelided  and  shortened,  see  Gr.  §  305,  (2). 

508.  Patria — terra  ;  to  hury  (thce)  in  thy  native  land,  at  my  departure. 

Patria  is  probably  intended  here  to  be  uscd  as  an  adjcctive  and  joined  with 
terra,  though  Gossrau  joins  it  as  a  noun  with  decedcns;  dcparting  from  my 

native  land. 510.  Funeris  nmbris  ;  to  the  shades  of  the  dead;  or,  o/(my) 

dead  body ;  funus  is  also  uscd  for  corpse  in  i.x.  491. 511.  Lacacnae; 

Helen;  the  Lacedaemonian  woman.     Scc  ii.  601. 512.  Monnmeuta  ;  me- 

mentoes,  tokcns. 513.  Ft.     Sce  on  vti,  i.  466. Falsa;  dcccitful;  bc- 

cause  they  were  occasioned  by  thc  falsc  bclicf  that  the  Greeks  had  dcpartcd. 

515.  Saltn  snper  TCnit;  leaped  over;  he  surmounted,  as  it  wcrc,  thc 

walls  of  Troy,  or  the  obstacle  of  the  Tvalls.— 517.  lila,  ctc. ;  Helen  was 
ncting  in  concert  with  the  Greeks.  By  lcading  the  Trojan  womcn  through 
thc  city  in  a  choral  procession,  shouting  the  praises  of  Bacchus,  she  easily 
obtained  the  opportuiiity,  without  exciting  suspicion,  of  giving  thc  .<55gnal 
with  a  torch  from  tlic  Acropolis,  which  was  answcrcd  by  the  torch  ou  board 
ihc  ship  of  Agamemnon,  so  that  Sinon  could  at  thc  propcr  monicnt  relcase 
the  Greeks  from  thc  wooden  horse.  Chorus  is  here  a  rehgious  or  festivc 
procession. Evanteg  orgia ;  cehhrating  the  orgies  of  fiarrhuit.     Evana  is 


BOOK    SIXTH.         *  521 

derived  from  the  Bacchanalian  cry,  Evoel  and  is  usnally  intransitive;  but 

here  takcs  the  acc.  orgia. 519.  Ex  arcc ;  she  hcrself  ascended  to  tha 

Acropolis  and  gave  the  signal  from  the  citadel,  with  thc  torch  which  she 
bore  in  the  procession.  This  appears  to  be  more  natural  than  that  she 
should  summon  the  Greelis  from  the  wooden  horse  on  the  Acropolis,  as 

eome  explain  it. 524.  Amovet,  snbdnxerat ;  removes  my  arms,  and  had 

already  secretly  taken  away  my  trusty  sword  from  my  Jiand.  The  pluperfcct 
is  to  be  taken  strictly,  implying  that  tlie  sword,  the  most  important  thing, 

was  first  secured,  and  afterwards  the  other  arms. 525.   In  ii.  567,  Helcn 

is  represented  as  seeking  refuge  in  the  temple  of  Yesta,  through  fear  both 
of  the  Greeks  aud  Trojans;  What  is  hcre  described  by  Dciphobus  may 
have  occurred  in  the  early  part  of  the  attack,  and  subsequently  the  fear  of 

punishment  may  have  taken  possession  of  her,  as  stated  in  ii.  o6Y. 526. 

Anianti ;  to  her  fond  husband. 528.  Tlialamo ;  dative  f^r  «i  thalamim. 

529.  Hortator  scelernm  AeoUdes  ;   Ulysses  accompanies  him  as  the  insti- 

ffator  ofthe  crime.  There  was  a  story  that  Ulysses  was  the  illegitimate  son 
of  Sisyphus,  though  supposed  to  be  the  son  of  Laertes,  and  hence  he  is  here 

contemptuously  styled  Aeolides,  from  Aeolus,  the  father  of  Sisyphus. 

Dii — instanrate ;  rfods,  repay  such  cruelties  to  the  Greehs  ;  cause  such  things 

to  be  perpetrated  again,  but  let  it  be  upon  the  Greeks. 531.  Qni  casns 

attnlerint;  what  chances  have  hrought  you;  a  question  dependcnt  on /are. 

533.  Pelagine  ;  do  you  come  led  hy  the  tvanderings  of  the  sea,  or  hy  the 

counsel  ofthe  gods?  Ulysses,  according  to  Hom.  Odys.  x.  508,  xi.  13,  sailed 
to  the  boundaries  of  the  ocean,  and  thus  came  to  the  entrauce  of  hell. 
Thus  one  might  reach  the  lower  world  by  sailing  over  the  occan ;  that  is, 

by  the  wanderings  of  the  sea. 534.  TnrMda;  gloomy ;  because  the  air 

is  filled  with  turbid  clouds.  Others  understand  it  of  the  wild,  uncultivated, 
and  unsightly  ground,  as  expvessed  above,  462,  in  loca  senta  situ. 

535-627.  Tlie  Sil)yl  interrupts  the  conversation  of  Aene.is  and  Deiphobus.  The 
journey  is  contiuued,  and  prescntly  they  come  in  sight  of  tho  gate  and  walls  of  Tarta- 
ru8.  Aeneas  Inquires  the  meaning  of  the  horrible  noises  arising  from  within,  and  the 
Sibyl  describes  the  punishments  inflicted  on  the  wicked. 

535.  Hac  vice  scrmonnm ;  in  the  course  of  this  conversation  ;  during  thia 
interchange  of  discourse.     Others  translate,  at  this  polnt  of  the  conversation. 

— Anrora ;  here  for  Sol,  and  the  opposite  of  Nox. Qnadrigis ;  some- 

times  four,  and  sometimes  tioo  horscs  are  assigned  to  Aurora.     Comp.  vii. 

26. 536.  Jam  medinm  (se)  trajiccrat  axem ;  had  already  passed  the  middle 

of  the  heavens ;  farther  than  tenet  or  contigerat  medium,  and  still  farther 
than  subibat.  Comp.  iii.  512,  v.  '721,  835.  Aeneas  and  the  Sibyl  had  com- 
menced  the  dcscent  at  dawn,  (see  above,  255,)  and  must  return  at  sunset. 
More  than  half  the  day  has  already  been  consumed,  while  much  remaina 
still  to  be  seen ;  and  especially  the  interview  with  Anchises  must  be  se- 

cured. 539.  Nox  rnit;  night  hastens  on;  in  a  short  time  his  visit  to  the 

lower  world  will  be  terminated  by  the  setting  of  the  sun.     When  the  shade 


522  NOTES   ON   THE   AENEID, 

of  Ancbises  hadTiscended  into  thcupper  world  he  was  obhged  to  ret.urn  «t 

thc  dawn,  instead  of  sunset.    Sce  v.  739. 540.  Partes  in  ambas ;  iiito 

two  parts;  the  point  where  two  ways  are  formed  from  one  ;  a  hivium.    Am- 
bas  is  herc  for  dtias.     The  Sibyl  spcaks  like  one  familiar  with  the  placc. 
541.  Dextera  qnae  ;  merely  a  disphicement  of  the  rclativc  for  quae  dextera; 
wliich  viay  lcads  on  the  right  to  the  palace  {moenid)  of  Pluto,  bi/  this  in 

our  journeij  to  Elysium.     The  accusativc,  Elysium,  like  Italiam,  i.  2. ■ 

543.  Exercet  poenas ;  the  left  hand  part,  or  way,  is  fancifully  said  to  exer- 
cise  thc  punishment  of  the  wicked,  because  it  leads  to  the  place  wherc  pun- 

ishment  is  executed. 544.  Kc  sacvi ;  be  not  anr/ry. 545.  Explebo  nu- 

mernm  ;  Iwill  fll  up  the  numher  ;  that  is,  of  my  companions;  I  will  again 
return  to  my  comrades  and  make  their  number  what  it  was  before.  The 
point  where  the  two  ways  diverge  marks  the  boundary  of  the  region  as- 
signed  to  those  who  have  fallen  in  battle,  and  beyond  which  they  must  not 

go. 548.  Rcspicit  Aeneas ;  Acncas,  while  still  standing  at  thc  junction  of 

the  two  ways,  withdraws  his  eyes  from  the  retiring  shade  of  Dciphobus,  and 
beholds  the  triple  walls  of  Tartarus  rising  at  the  eud  of  the  left  hand  avenue. 

Snb  rnpc  sioistra ;  i.  e.  under  the  left  hand  side  of  the  towering  rock 

which  separates  the  two  ways. 549.  Moenia  lata  ;  a  hroad  city. 550. 

Torrentibns;  an  adjective  ;  rushing. 551.  Phlegethon;  the  rivcr  of  fire 

which  surrounds  the  walls  of  Tartarus ;  less  frcquently  mentioned  than  the 

other  rivers  of  Hades. Torquetquc;    for  torquens.     The  river  rolls  or 

hurls  rocks  along  its  channel. 552.  Advcrsa ;  see  above,  on  279;  frout- 

ing  the  beholder. 553.  Fcrro  ;  in  some  editions  bello  is  substituted,  on 

the  authority  of  several  manuscripts. 555.  Tisiphone ;  one  of  the  furies. 

The  early  Greek  poets  mentioned  no  particular  number  of  the  furies,  but 
later  poets  limit  them  to  three  :  Tisiphone,  AUecto,  and  Megaera.  See  vii.  324, 
and  xii.  846.  Palla.  See  on  i.  648.  There  is  an  inconsistency  between 
the  statement  here  and  that  in  280,  where  the  furies  are  said  to  have  their 

chamber  or  couch  in  the  vestibule  of  Hades. 558.  Stridor  ferrl ;   the 

clank  of  iron  ;  the  foUowing  words,  tractaeque  catenae,  explain  stridor.     For 

thc  usage  of  the  participlc  tractae,  see  Gr.  §  274,  R.  5. 559.  Uaesit ;  he 

stoodfixcd;  the  morc  common  reading,  i^trepitum  hausit,  is  prcfcrred  by  Thiel 

and  others. 560.  Fadcs ; /wm  or  charactcr;  what  form  of  w>ckedncas 

(is  punished  hcrc.) 561.  Ad  anras ;    rises  on  high  ;  supply  surgit. 

563.  Fas ;  supply  est. Casto.    Not  to  the  pious ;  only  to  the  wicked. 

Insisterc,  to  trcad  iipon,  commonly  takes  thc  dative ;  here  the  accusa- 

tivc. 564.  Praefccit ;  placed  me  over,  or  7nade  me  pricstcss  of.     Conip. 

rtbove,  118. 565.  Dcdm  poenas  ;  punishmcnts  of  the  gods ;  punishmeuts 

inflicted  by  thc   dccree  of  thc  gods. Pcr  omnla ;    through  all  places; 

tlnough  all  parts  of  Tartarus. 56G.  Gnoslns ;  Crctan.     Sce  on  v.  806. 

Rhadamanthnswas  a  brothcr  of  Minos.     As  a  judge  in  Hades  he  deala 

only  with  condcmncd  criminals,  and  hcnce  sits  bcfore  Tartarus,  wherc  hia 
ofTicc  Ib  likc  that  of  thc  IViumviri  Capitales,  to  mctc  out  punishmcnt  to 


BOOK   SIXTH. 


523 


toosc  who  have  already  been  consigned  to  imprisonment  under  his  charge. 
In  order  to  do  this  he  ascertains  the  greater  orless  enormity  of  their  crimea 
by  questioning,  (audit,)  and  in  some  cases  by  torture,  (subigit  fateri.') 

567.   €astigat ;    injlicts  jjunishment. Dolos  ;   treacherous  deeds. 568, 

569.    IVhat  atonements  for  crimes  committed  any  one,  rejoicing  in  vain  con- 

cealment,  has  postponed  in  the  world  above  to  the  too  late  hour  of  death. 

Qaae  is  relative,  not  interrogative,  the  antocedent  piacula  being  omitted 

a.itev  fateri.    See  Gr.  §  206,  (3). Inani ;  vainj  because  the  secret  will  be 

made  known  after  death. Piacnla ;  for  crimina  expianda ;  crimes  to  be 

atoned  for. 5T0.  Continao  ;  forthwith;   as  soon  as  Rhadamanthus  has 

awarded  the  punishment,  the  criminals  are  scourged  by  the  furies. Ac- 

cincta  ;  armed. 511.  Qaatit;  she  lashes  or  scourges  the  guilty  (sontes)  to 

the  gate,  which  upon  her  approach  stands  open  to  receive  them.     Her  sis- 

ters  aid  her  in  the  work. 572.  Angaes ;  her  whip  is  armed  with  snakes. 

■ Sorornm.    See  above,  on  555. 573.  Tnm  demam;  then  at  length; 

when  the  scourging  has  been  performed  the  gate  of  Tartarus  opens  wide, 

and  the   condemned   are   thrust   in  by   the   furies. Sacrae ;    accursed. 

Comp.  iii.  57. 574.  Cnstodia,    for  cu^tos,  refers  to  Tisiphone ;    so  also 

facies,   below. 577.    Tam;    then  moreover ;  while  these  objects  are  so 

terrible,  at  the  same  time  Tartarus  itself  is  frightful  on  accouut  of  its  vast- 

ness. 578«  In  praeceps;  downwards. 579.   As  much  as  the  distance 

(literally,  upward  view)  to  the  ethereal  Olympus.     The  depth  of  Tartarus 
iS    twice     as     great 
as  the  distance  from 

earth  to  heaven. 

Coeli  is  added  to  dis- 
tinguish  the  heaven- 
ly  Olympus  from  the 
Thessalian  mountain 
of    that     name. 

580.  GenHS  Terrae; 
progeny     of    Terra. 

Titania    pnbes ; 

the  Titans,  sons  of 
Coelus  and  Terra, 
who  at  first  with  Sat- 
urn  held  sway  over 
the  universe,  but 
were     at     last    con-  Jupiter  destroying  the  Gianta. 

quered  by  Jupiter  and  hurled  down  to  Tartarus  by  his  thunderbolts. 

581.  For  the  construction  of  Dejecti,  see  Gr.  §  205,  R.  3,  (1). 582. 

Aloidas ;  Otus   and  Ephialtes,  the  sons  of  Aloeus,  powerful  giants   who 

warred  against  the  gods. 583.  Rescindere  ;  to  cut  down  or  rase ;  as,  for 

example,  the  walls  and  battlements  of  a  city ;  hence  here  caehim,  as  the  city 


524 


NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 


and  citadel  (arx)  of  the  gods. 585.  Dantcm  poenas ;  suffering  punish 

ments. Salmonea ;  Sahnoncus,  the  son  of  Aeolus,  brother  of  Sisyphua, 

and  king  of  Elis,  whcrc  he  fouiided  the  city  of  SahBoniu  or  Salmono. 

586.  Dnm  imitator;  cven  while  imitating  the  lightning  and  thunder  of  Ju- 
piter,  he  was  ovcrtaken  with  his  punishmcnt.  Jacob  thus  makcs  dum  rcfei 
to  the  conimencemcnt  of  his  sufFcrings.  But  Gossrau  understands  these 
words  to  describe  his  punishment,  as  consisting  in  ihe  forccd  and  constant 
repetition  of  the  action  which  he  had  impiously  attemptcd  on  carth  ;  thus, 
he  suffers  punishment  while  (that  is,  in)  imitatijig,  or  bcing  compelled  to 

imitate. 588.  Urbem  ;  Salmonia. 591.  Acre;  withbronze;  he  rode  in 

a  bronze  chariot  over  plates  of  bronze  or  copper  spread  upon  tbe  ground. 

Simnlaret.    Gr.  §  264,  8. 593.  Taedis  ;  uith  pitchy  wood;  the  cause 

oi  fumea. 594.    Tnrbine;   with  the  lightning-blast ;    turbo  is  hore  the 

thunderbolt  hurled  with  force  and  fury  like  a  tornado. Praecipiteni  adc- 

git;   cast  him  headlong ;  i.  e.  down  to  Tartarus. 595.  Tityon;  Tityos 

was  a  giant  who  was  slain  by  the  arrows  of  Apollo  and  Diana  for  offering 
violence  to  their  mother,   Latona,  and  then  punished  in  Tartarus.     See 

Odys.  xi.  5*76-581. Alnmnnm ;  either  for  Jilium,  or  elsc  to  be  taken 

literally,  foster-son,  according  to  the  myth  which  said  that  hc  was  the  son 
of  Elara  and  Jupiter,  and  concealed  in  the  womb  of  thc  earth,  in  order  to 

escape  the  jealousy  of  Juno. 596.  Cernerc  erat ;  for  cemeres  or  licuit 

cernere;  you  could  see  ;  Tityos  could  be  sccn;  literally,  thcre  was  a  heholding 
Tityos.     Comp.  viii.  6Y6.    Zumpt,  §  22*7,  makes  est  in  this  phrase  cquivalent 

to  licet. 598.  Immortale ;  imperishaUe ;  because  restored  day  by  day. 

— — Fccnnda  pocnis;  fruitful  for  punishments  ;  his  liver  daily  reproduces 

itself /o)- tortures  ever  renewcd. 599.  Epnlis;  dative  ; /or  his  banquct. 

601.  Ixiona ;  Ixion  was  thc  fathcr  of  ririthoiis  and  king  of  thc  Lapi- 


Sisyphua,  Ixion,  and  Tautalus. 
Uiae. 602.  — qnc  loscs  its  final  vowcl  hcrc  by  synapheia. 


-603.  <;ep 


BOOK   SIXTH.  525 

elibns  J  festivc;  at  the  fcstivc  table"a  Roraan  was  said  to  gratify  his  guardian 
Genius,  or  attendant  spirit ;  hencc  the  sense  of  genialihus  in  the  prescnt 

instancc. 605.  Fnri.irum  niaxinia;  Allecto  or  Megaera. 608.  InTisi 

fratres;  instances  of  hatred  to  brothers  are  presented  in  Atreus,  Thjcstes, 

Eteocles,  and  Polynices. G09.  Pnlsatas  parcns ;  one  of  the  laws  of  the 

XII.  tables  said,  Qid  patrem  pulsaverit,  manus  ei  fraecidantur ;  another, 
Patronus  si  clienii  fraudeni  fecerit,  sacer  esto.  It  was  natural  to  infer  that 
what  was  regarded  as  so  criminal  by  the  early  Romans  should  be  severely 

punished  also  in  Tartarus. 610.  Qni  soli,  etc. ;  who  reposed  alone  in  theif 

accumulated  loealth;  imparting  none  even  to  their  relatives  (swis.) 613. 

loipia;  the  civil  wars  are  thus  designated.  Horace,  0.  2,  1,  30,  also  says 
i77ipia  praelia  of  the  battles  of  the  civil  wars.  Thcre  is  no  reproach  against 
Augustus  impL!ed,  as  his  enemies  are  considered  the  movers  of  these  wars, 

and  he  only  as  the  defender  of  the  country. Dominomm  fallere  dextras ; 

io  violate  their  pledges  to  their  masters  ;  the  right  hands  of  masters  ;  because 
the  right  hand  of  a  master  is  grasped  when  a  promise  of  fidelity  is  made. 

615.  Pocnam ;  supply  exspcctant. Forma  fortunaye ;  what  kind  (of 

crime),  or  tvhat  circumstances  (of  hfe),  have  plunged  the  men  (in  woe.) 

618.  Tlieseus  was  chained  to  a  rock  in  Tartarus  on  account  of  the  attempt 

mentioned  above  in  397. Piilegyas,  the  father  of  Ixion,  had  set  fire  to 

the  'iemple  of  ApoUo  at  Delphi,  and  in  Tartarus  was  condemned  to  a  punish- 

ment  similar  to  that  of  Tantalus. 622.  Fixit — refixit ;  put  up  and  took 

down;  estabUshed  and  annulled;  Roman  laws  were  engravcd  on  bronze  ta- 
bles  and  fastened  on  the  walls  of  the  Capitol.     Marc  Antony  is  an  example 

of  such  a  reckless  ruler  as  is  here  pointed  out. 626.  Comprenaere ;  to 

sum  up,  or  embrace,  in  dcscription.  Tor  the  subjunctive  present  here,  see 
on  i.  58.     She  could  mention  but  few  of  their  crimes  and  penalties. 

628-683.  Aeneas  deposits  the  golden  'bough  at  the  entrance  6i  Pluto'B  palace  and 
passes  on  to  the  right,  into  tho  Elysian  fields.  Here  he  sees  tho  shades  of  variona 
classes  of  men  engaged  in  the  pursuits  and  pleasures  in  which  they  delighted  when 
living.  Among  these  is  the  ancient  bard  Musaeus,  who  by  the  request  of  the  Sihyl 
points  out  the  way  to  the  place  where  the  shade  of  AnchiBes  dwells. 

629.  Susceptnm  perfice  mnnns ;  finish  the  offering  you  have  undertaken  ; 

i.  e.  the  gift  of  the  golden  branch. 630.  Cyclopnm  educta  caminis  ;  huilt 

hy  theforges  of  the  Cyclops.     The  house  of  Pluto  is  of  iron  wrought  by  the 

Cyclops,  or  workmen  of  Vulcan. 631.  Advcrso  fornlce  portas  ;  ihe  gates 

nnder  ihe  archway  opposite  ;  opposite  to  us.     Thc  gate  opens  at  the  end  ol 

an  arched  vestibule  in  front  of  the  palace. 632.  Haec  dona  ;  for  the  sin- 

gular ;    this  gift. ^Praecepta  ;    the  (divine)  instructions. 633.    Opaca 

viaram.    See  on  i.  310. 631.  Corripiunt.    See  on  i.  418. Spatium 

uedinm ;   the  space  between  them  and  the  palace. 635.  Aditnm  ;  the 

vestibule.     Here,  as  at  the  entrance  of  a  temple,  there  is  a  vase  of  holy 

water  with  which  the  dcvotee  must  purify  himself. 636.  In  limine ;  he 

euspends  the  branch  on  the  door-post. 637.  Dlvae ;  to  the  goddess  Pro 


526 


NOTES   ON   THE   AENEID. 


eerpine. 638.  Deyenere  locos.    Comp.  i.  305. .Imoena  ;  this  adjective 

is  properly  applied  to  objects  pleasing  to  the  eye ;  hence  to  scenery. 

640,  641.  Hic— pnrpnrco ;  here  a  more  expanded  atmosphcre  (than  that  of 
thc  gloomy  regions  just  left  by  Aeneas)  and  (onc)  of  ylowing  light  clothes 
thejields.  Othcrs  supply  vestit  campos  after  aether;  tlius,  afrecr  air  clothes 
theficlds  and  clothes  the  fields  loith  glowing  light.     So  Anthon  and  Ladewig. 

For  the  final  syllable  of  aether,  sce  Gr.  §  299,  2,  exc.  3. Nornnt ;  tliei, 

(the  sliades)  enjoy. 642.  Palaestris  ;  on  the  grassg  turf ;  grounds  su'itable 

for  athletic  sports. 644.  Plandnnt  choreas ;  heat  the  dances. 615.  Sa- 

cerdos  ;  Orpheus,  the  most  famous  bard  of  thc  heroic  period,  is  also  callcd 
here  ^pms^,  because  the  Grecian  orgics  and  mysteries  were  first  cclcbrated 

by  him. 646.  Obloquitnr;  sounds  in  respome ;  he  accompanies  with  his 

lyre  either  the  songs  of  others,  mentioned  in  the  above  passage,  or,  what 
is  more  probable,  his  own.  The  verse  may  be  rendered,  sounds  responsive 
m  nwnbers  the  seven  varying  notes.  The  lyre  of  seven  strings,  furnishin- 
seven  open  notes,  is  here  assigned  to  him,  though  that  number  of  strings 
was  not  used  until  a  much  later  period.  Some  with  Wagner  make  numeris 
in  the  dative  case,  and  refer  it  to  the  rhythms  or  measures  both  of  the  singers 
and  dancers ;  as  if  Orpheus  were  accompanying,  or  rathcr  leading  them  with 
his  instrument.  But  Virgil  would  more  naturally  oonceive  of  Orpheus  as 
Horace  (0.  2,  13,  25  sq.)  does  of  Sappho  and  Alcaeus,  as  playing  in  response 

to  their  own  voices,  while  the  shades  gather  round  to  listen. 647.  Di<'i- 

tis,  pcctine ;  he  touches  the  strings  with  his  fingers  to  produce  a  soft  sound, 

and  wit.h  the  plectrum  when  louder  riotes  are  required. 649.  Melioribns 

annis;  in  the  better  thnes ;  the  ages  bcfore  Laomedon  and  Priam. 650 

Dardanus  and  Ilus  were  the  most  illustrious  kings  and  founders  of  Trojan 

cities;    Assaracus  was  the  great-grandfather  of  Aeneas.     See  i.  284 

651.  Inanes;  unsubstantial. 653.  Gratia ; /o^icfnm  ;  Wiavt^WY ,  acceptaUc- 

ness. Carrnnm;  pronounced  here  currum. 657.  Yescentes;  banguet- 

tng. 658,  659.  Unde— amnis ;   whence  the  full  stream  of  the  Eridanus 

rolls  throngh  the  forcst  (into  the  world)  above.  Virgil,  in  G.  iv.  36G-373 
makes  Ilades  the  source  of  the  great  rivers  on  earth;  /m»  thence  he  ^ays' 
burstsforth  the Eridanus,  thanwhich  no  other  stream  more  violent fiows forth 
through  the  fertile  fields  into  the  purple  sca.  Superne  is  eithcr  upward  or 
from  above;  if  we  take  the  lattcr  meaning  here,  as  some  do,  the  ideas  seem 

confuscd.     Eridanus  is  put  by  Virgil  for  tho  Po. 660.  Passi ;  who  have 

suffered;  for  the  construction,  sce  above  on  581. 667.  Musacnm  •  Mu- 

saeus  was  a  contemporary  of  Orphcus,  and  like  him  was  rovercd  as  one  who 
had  made  use  of  poetry  and  music  as  meaus  of  redecming  mcn  from  barbar- 
Ism.     Ilomer  could  not  be  introduccd  hcrc,  as  he  flourishcd  subsequentlv  to 

the  agc  of  Aencas,  tliough  so  muny  ccnturies  before  Virgil. 668.  Snsi)I- 

dt;  looks  up  to. 670.  llllns  crgo ;  for  his  sal-e. 673.  Ccrtn;  fixed 

definite. 674.  Riparnm  toros  ;  the  turfy  couclies  of  the  shores. Recen- 

tia  rivis ;  /r«s/i  with  broohs;  waterod  by  fcrtlliziug  strcams,  and  therofore 


BOOK  sixTH.  52V 

always  green. 615.  Si  fejrt,  etc. ;  if  the  desire  in  yoitr  heart  so  directs. 

676.  Jngnni ;  siamnit,  or  height. 678.  Ostentat;  Musaeus  from  the 

top  of  the  hill  shows  thera  the  pathway,  and  thcy  descend  on  the  other  side, 

while  he  returns  to  his  companions. Dehinc.     See  on  i.  256. 679. 

Pcnitns;  far  cfown  (in  the  valley.) 680.  Itnras;  destined  to  go. 681. 

Stndio  recolens ;  considering  eamestly. 682.  Fortc  ;  it  so  happened  tha< 

he  waa  jiist  at  this  time  tracing  out  the  destinies  of  his  descendants. 

683.  Manns;  deeds. 

684-751.  Anchises  receives  Aeneas  with  an  affectionate  greeting,  and  flrst  conversea 
with  him  ontbenature  and  condition  of  the  innumerable  spirits  which  are  seen  flitting 
about  the  river  Lethe. 

685.  Palmas  ntrasqne.     Comp.  v.  233.     The  plural  of  uterque  is  some- 
times  used  for  the  singular  when  we  spealc;  of  two  objects  naturaUy  connect- 

ed,  especially  where  we  use  the  word  "pair." 686.  Genis ;  for  de  genis. 

687.   Tandem;    at  length ;    after  being  long  expected. Expectata 

parcnti ;  expected,  looked  for,  by  thyfather.  As  if  he  had  said,  I  have  long 
hoped  that  your  filial  piety  would  impel  you  to  malie  this  visit.     In  some 

editions  spectata,  proved,  tvell  tried,  is  substituted  for  exspectata. 688. 

Iter  dnrnni ;  the  difficult  passage  ;  the  horrors  and  toils  of  the  descent. 

690.    The  shade  of  Anchises  had  warned  Aeneas  when  in  Sicily  to  seelc  thia 

iuterview.    See  v.  731  sqq. 691.  Tempora dinnmerans  ;  counting  the  days. 

Cnra  ;  my  anxious  hope ;  my  expectation  mingled  with  doubt. 692. 

Terras ;  governed  by  per,  which  in  prose  would  stand  before  it  rather  than 

before  aequora.     Comp.  ii.  654. 694.  Ne  qnid ;  lest  in  any  respect. 

696.  Tendere  adeglt ;  for  the  infinit.  instead  of  the  subj.  with  ut,  see  Gr. 

278,  n.  4,  b. ;  Z.  §  616  ;  comp.  vii.  113. 697.  Stant  classes  ;  my  ships  are 

moored.    Comp.  iii.  277. Tyrrheno.    See  i.  67. Da  jnngere;  grant 

(me)  to  join  my  right  hand  with  thine ;  for  the  infinitive  after  dare,  see  on 

i.  66. 698.  Amplexn.    See  above,  on  465. 700-702.    See  the  same 

verses,  ii.  792-794. 70.3.  In  valle  redncta;  in  the  secluded  valley ;  not 

another  valley,  but  the  same  in  which  Aeneas  found  his  father ;  termed,  in 
679,  convalle ;  a  vale  completely  shut  in  by  liills,  and  thus  separated  from 
the  other  parts  of  Elysium.  Aeneas  is  at  once  struck  with  amazement  at 
the  multitude  of  spirits  flitting  about  the  banks  of  Lethe,  which  winda 
tlirough  this  valley.     Anchises  had  beeu  engaged  in  contemplating  these. 

See  above,  679  sqq. 704.  Yirgnlta  sonantia  silvae  ;  the  rustling  shncbbery 

of  the  forest.  Forbiger  prefcrs  the  reading  silvis,  Wagner  siha  ;  a»d  the 
latter  understands  the  words  to  mean,  the  young  trees  rustUng  with  theit 
Koody  growth.  Nemus  is  the  glade  watered  by  the  Lethe  and  diversified  by 
clustcrs  of  young  trees  scattered  here  and  there  on  either  side  of  the  river. 

705.  Praenatat ;  floics  before,  or  along ;   followed  by  the  accusative, 

like  pracfluit,  Hor.  0.  4,  14,  26.     See  Gr.  §  233,  R.  1 ;  Z.  §  386,  note. 

•706.  Gentes;  races. Popnli;  nations. 707.  Acvelnt;  ac,  foUowed  by 

velut,  serves  to  introduce  a  comparison;  i.  148,  ii.  626. 709.  Fundnntnr^ 


528 


N0TE8   ON    THE   AENEID. 


iwarm;  are  spread. Strcplt ;  supply  s«c,  answering  to  i^e^w^ ;  so  the  wliole 

feld  murmurswith  the  hum  (of  the  spirit  niultitudes.) 711.  Sint"  the 

question  depends  ou  inscius. Porro ;  i7i  ihe  distaiice ;  irop^o,;  rcferring 

to  the  distant  windings  of  Lethe. 713,  714.  Qnibns— debentnr ;  to  whom 

new  bodies  are  destined  by  fate ;  bodies  othcr  than  those  which  they  have 
previously  occupied  in  the  workl  above.  See  below,  Y48-751.  The  view 
herc  given  bj  Anchises  of  the  origin,  successive  statcs,  and  final  destiny  of 
eouls,  is  probably  the  expression  of  Virgil's  own  bclief,  as  derivcd  from"  tlie 

Btudy  of  the  Grcek  philqsophers,  and  of  Plato  in  particular. Ad  ;  by. 

715.  Secm-OS  laticcs;  literally,  the  waters  without  care  ;  it  may  be  translated, 
thc  teaters  of  rest,  because  a  draught  from  the  river  Lethe  produccs  absolute 
forgetfulness  of  the  past.     Thus  Ovid,  ep.  ex.  Pont.  ii.  4,  23,  Zethcs  securae. 

716.  Has;  these  spirits ;   these  in  particular.     Anchises  points  out  a 

ccrtain  portion  of  the  multitude,  or  rathcr,  one  out  of  the  popnli  raentioned 

above,  TOC. 717.  Jampridem  cnpio ;  these  words  belong  equally  to  the 

foregoing  line  and  to  this  ;  thcse  spirits,  tkis  procfemj  of  my  (descendants)  / 
have  been  long  desiring,  &c.     The  repetition  of  the  pronoun,  has,  hanc,  is 

similar  to  that  in  iii.  659. 718.  Qno  magis ;  in  order  that  the  more.     Gr. 

§  262,  R.  9;  Z.  §  536. Italia  reperta  ;  in  the  discovery  of  Italy  ;  i.  e.  re- 

joice  that  you  have  at  length,  after  so  much  hardshio,  achieved  your  voyage 

to  Italy.     For  the  participle  here,  see  Gr..§  2Y4,  R.  5 ;  Z.  §  637. 719. 

Aliqnas;  any  indeed;  really  any.     See  Gr.  §  207,  R.  30,  b ;  Z.  §  708. 

Ad  coelnm  ;  to  the  upper  light ;  into  the  world  above,  as  opposed  to  Hades. 
Sce  on  128.  The  question  expresses  the  surprise  of  Aenea?  that  any 
should  be  so  mad  as  to  desire  again  to  be  plunged  in  the  miseries  of  human 

life;    hence  anne,  denoting  something  incredible. 720.   Sublimes ;    on 

high,  ov  up.     Comp.  i.  415. Tarda  ;  gross ;  that  shackle  the  movcmenta 

of  the  mind.     See  below,  731. 723.  Snscipit ;  replies  ;  takes  up  the  dis- 

coarse. 724.  A  spirit  (spiritus)  cndowcd  with  intcnigencc,  Cnmis,)  that 

is,  a  life-giving  and  intelligent  soul,  pervades  the  whole  world  ia  all  its  ele- 
ments  and  parts ;  it  is  the  soid  of  which  the  material  univcrsc  is  thc  body. 
From  this  a7iima  miuidi  emanate  the  individual  souls  of  all  living  creatures, 
which  are  thus  scintillations,  as  it  were,  from  the  ethercal  ficry  substance 
of  the  all-pervading  mind.  Ileuce  thcse  seeds  or  souls  possess  a  fiery  ener- 
yy  {igneiis  vigor)  such  as  belongs  to  the  ethcreal  or  celcstial  substance  from 
which  thcy  originatc,  (caclestis  origo.)     Such  is  thc  idea  conveycd  in  tliis 

passage. Campos  liqnentes ;  the  sca. — ^725.  Titania  Jistra  ;  the  heavenly 

bodies ;  the  sun  and  the  stars ;  or,  as  some  of  thc  bcst  comnicntators  undcr- 
Btand,  ihe  lilanian  orb,  the  sun  ;  the  plural  bcing  put  for  the  singular. 
Both  Sol  and  Luna  were  childrcn  of  the  Titan,  Uypcrion.     Comp.  iv.  119. 

126,727.  Spiritas,  the  principlc  that  givcs  vitality ;  mens,  thc  intelli- 

gencc  which  dirccts. Artns;  theparts;  the  mcmbcrs  of  thc  great  matc- 

rial   body  (i/iagiium   corpus)  which  encloscs   the   uniTersal  spirit. 788. 

Inde ;  /row  this  source;  Ileync  refcrs  it  to  spiritus  and  mcm ;  Wagncr  and 


BOOK   SIXTH.  529 

otliers  to  the  combination  of  the  spirit  and  the  material  elcmcnts,  air,  earth, 

water,  and  firc,  just  dcscribed, Yitae  TOlantnm  5  the  lives  of  fying  crca- 

tures  ;  the  race  of  birds. 729.  Marmoreo  snb  aeqnorc  ;  under  its  sniooth 

surface ;  IWc  polished  marble. 730,731.  IgncnsTlgor;  a  fiory  encrgy. 

Ollis  semiuibas  ;  to  these  sceds  of  being ;  tlicse  sparks,  as  it  were,  from 

the  all-pervading  fire,  or  subtle  principle  of  vitality  and  thought,  whicli  most 

resembles  fire. Qnantnm  ;  so  far  as.    This  ethcreal  force  manifests  it- 

self  especially  in  man,  so  far  as  the  baneful  iufluences  of  the  animal  passions 

do  not  impede  its  working. 733.  Hinc  ;  hence ;  hy  rcason  of  this ;  i.  e. 

from  the  debasing  union  of  the  body  with  the  soul,  imphed  in  the  preceding 
clause.     Fear,  desire,  gricf,  and  joy,  were  all  regarded,  espccially  by  the 

Stoics,  as  weak  affections  contracted  by  the  soul  from  the  body. Anras ; 

the  pure  air;  the  upper  region  of  the  heavens  from  which  they  sprung. 

734.  Dispicinnt;    discern. Clansae;   supply  animae,  ov  illac.     See  720. 

737.  Penitns;  join  with  inolescere. 738.  Multa  din  concrcta ;  7na7iy 

impurities  long  accumulating. Inolcscere  ;  supply  illis  ;  to  fasten  upon, 

or  adhere  to  them.     They  become  incorporated  with  the  souls  of  men  by 

growth. Miris  modis  ;  in  a  viondcrful  way.     Comp.  i.  054. 740-742. 

The  punishments  inflictcd  for  the  purification  of  souls  are  varied  according 
to  the  nature  and  degree  of  the  guilt  contracted  in  life.  Exposure  to  the 
winds  suffices  for  one  class,  others  must  be  purged  under  a  great  gulf  of 

■water,  while  the  deepest  infection  is  purged  by  fire. Infectum  scelns  ;  the 

contracted  guilt. 743.  Qnisqne — Manes  ;  we  suffer  each  his  peculiar  pun- 

ishments.  The  Manes  are,  1,  the  shades  of  tbe  dead;  2,  avenging  powcrs 
of  the  lower  world ;  3,  penaltics  inflicted  by  these  powers.  In  the  latter  sense 
it  seems  to  be  used  here ;  though  other  explanalions  are  given.  The  idea 
of  the  whole  passage,  743-Yol,  seems  to  be  this:  we  are  all  purged  from 
the  corporeal  stain  by  processes  more  or  less  severe,  aud  which  require 
more  or  less  time,  according  to  the  dcgree  of  the  moral  infection.  There- 
upon  we  are  admitted  to  vast  Elysium,  and  a/ew  of  us,  by  the  special  favor 
of  the  gods,  not  destined  to  go  again,  like  these  great  multitudes,  (see  above, 
'ZlSj^into  other  bodies,  but  permitted  to  retain  forever  our  idcntity,  occupy 
these  blissful  fields  until  we  are  free  from  the  very  last  traces  of  corporeal 
impurity,  and  thus  become  once  more  unmixed,  ethereal,  ficry  essence,  as 
at  the  first.  But  all  these  "to  whom  earthly  bodies  are  again  allotted  by 
fate,"  are  conducted  after  the  lapse  of  a  thousand  years  to  the  borders  of 
Lethe,  and  prepared  by  its  oblivious  waters  to  enter  upon  that  new  exist- 
ence.  It  seems  obvious  that  Anchises,  and  such  as  he,  (^patici,)  who  were 
already  deified  in  the  minds  of  their  desccndants,  would  not  be  represented 
as  subject  to  the  fate  of  the  great  multitude  of  shades  dcstined  to  lose  theit 
idsntity.  That  is,  Anchises  must  coutinue  to  exist  forever  as  Anchises. 
Hence  there  was  a  marked  coutrast  intended  between  panci  and  has  oinnes, 
which,  perhaps,  the  poet  would  liave  brought  out  with  more  distinctnesa 
li  ad  he  revised  the  work. 743.  Per ;  better  than  in  to  suggest  the  vast 

23 


530  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

extent  of  Elysium;  throughout  Elysinm. 744.    Teuemas  ;    iihalnt. 

745.    Pcrfecto  orbe ;    the  proper  circuit  of  time  bcing  completed. 746, 

Coneretam  laliem ;   the  contracted  stain. 747.  Aetherinm  sensnm ;  t/ie 

ethereal  soul. Anrai  simplitis  igncm  ;  the  fire  of  unmixed  air ;  uniuixed 

ethereal  fire ;  tlie  same  notion  as  in  730.     For  the  genitive,  ai<j-ai,  see  Gr. 

§  43. 74S.  Ilas  omnes;  all  such  spirits  as  these,  which  hare  already  at- 

tracted  your  attcntion,  flitting  about  the  Lethe.  'See  above,  716. Rotam 

TOlrere;  have  passed  through  the  circuits  of  a  thousa^id  years ;  have  goue 

through  the  annual  round  a  thousand  times.      See  on  volverc,  i.   9. • 

750.  Supciil  COnvcxa;  the  vault  above ;    the  sky  of  the   upper  world;  ap 
coelwn,  719. 

753-001.  Anchises  now  conducts  Aeneas  and  the  Sibyl  into  the  midst  of  the  sh.ides 
destined  to  enter  new  bodies,  and  points  ont  among  thcm  the  great  charaoters  who  aro 
in  siiccessive  gonerations  to  illustrate  the  history  of  Rome.  Having  spent  the  time  al- 
lotted  to  Aeneas  in  giving  this  account  of  his  posterity,  and  in  advising  hiiu  as  to  hia 
future  conduct  in  Italy,  Anchises  dismisses  him  and  tho  Sibyl  from  Ilades  by  tho 
ivory  gate. 

753.  Sonantcra  ;  murmurlng.     Comp.  709. 751.  Possct.     Gr.  §  204-, 

5;  Z.  §  5G7. 755.  Advcrsos  ;  opposite  ;  as  they  approached  from  the  op- 

posito  dircction. Legcre  ;  to  gather  up  with  the  e;-e  ;  to  revieiv,  or  survey. 

Discere;  to  mark;  to  learu  to  distinguish  the  countenances  from  each 

otlier;  to  individualize  them. 756.  Dcindc  ;  hcreafter ;  after  your  gene- 

ration  shall  have  passed  away. Scquatnr;  is  dcstined  to  follow. 757, 

Mancant  {tlhi) ;  aivait  thee  ;  hterally,  remainfor  thee.    Comp.  ix.  302.     The 

questions  depeud  upon  crpedlam  dictis. Itala  de  gcnte  ;  of  Italian  de- 

scent;    frora  Lavinia,  the  future  Italian  wife  of  Aeneas. ^758,     Souh 

(wliich  shall  be)  illustrious  and  shall  succecd  to  our  name  ;  reccive  our  name 

and  transmit  it  to  others. Itnras  ;  the  future  participle  hcre  denotcs  des- 

tiny.     Comp.  above,  713,  714. — -759.  Espediam  dictis.     See  iii.  4G0. 

Te  tna  fata,   See  890  sqq. 760.    The  Julian  family  descended  from  Asea- 

nius  or  lulus,  who  succeeded  to  his  father  and  founded  Alba  Longa,  (i.  267, 
sq(|. ;)  but  thc  line  of  Alban  Idngs  sprung  from  Silvius,  whom  Lavinia  bore  to 
Aeneas  hite  in  hfe.     This  is  the  tradition  adopted  by  Virgil  in  this  passagc. 

Othors   make   Silvius  the   son  and   succcssor  of  Ascanius.      Ileyne. 

Vldes  ;  uscd  parenthctically. Pnra  liasta  ;  on  a  headless  spear  ;  thc  shafl 

of  the  spear  without  the  point ;  that  is,  a  sceptre.  The  hasta  pura  was  a 
badge  of  heroism.     For  the  case,  see  Gr.  §  245,  ii.  1 ;  Z.  §  452,  secoud 

paragraph. 761.  Proximj»— loca  ;  holds  byfate  the  frst  (earlicst)  place  in 

the  light  (above) ;  by  lot  Silvius  has  precedencc  of  all  the  rcst  in  ascending 

into  the  uppor  world. 763.  Albanam  nomcn  ;  an  Albau  name ;  that  ia, 

himself  an  Alban. Postnma  ;  latcst ;  some  understand  it  in  the  scnse  of 

j)OKthumous ;  born  after  the  dcalh  of  Acueas ;  and  this  intcrpretation  ac- 
cords  with  the  morc  authentic  account  of  Silvius;  but  thc  words  tibi  longac- 
vo  edtccet,  shall  bear  to  thee  in  old  age,  arc  not  casy  to  rcconcilo  with  such  an 


BOOK    8IXTH.      .  531 

interpretation ;  and  Caesellius,  in  Gell.  N.  A.  ii.  IG,  gives  the  true  sense  of 
the  'word:  Posiiima  proles  non  eiim  significat  qvi,  patre  mortuo,  sed  qui 
postre?no  loco  natus  cst,  sicuti  Silvius,  qui,  Aenea  jam  sene,  tardo  seroque 

partu  editus  est. 765,  Silvis ;  hcnce  his  name  Silvius ;  for  he  was  born 

and  reared  in  the  woods. T66.  rndc ;  iovaquo;  (sprung) /rowi  w^om. 

T6T.  Proxiinns;  nexf  to  him,  as  thej  appcsr  among  the  shades,  uot 

next  in  their  historical  order.  The  shadcs  of  tho  whole  Alban  dy&isty  are 
grouped  around  Silvius,  but  Procas,  Capys,  Xumitor,  and  Sylvius  Aeneas, 
happen  to  be  next  to  liim ;  so  the  poet  fancies.     Fcr  the  historical  order  of 

the  Alban  kings,  see  Livy,  i.  3. T70.  Si  nmqnam ;  until  his  fifty-tbird 

year  Aeneas  Silvius  was  licpt  from  his  throne  by  his  uncle,  who  had  acted 

as  his  guardian. TT2.  Atqne  nmbrsta  gcrant;  and  they  also  bear  tkeir 

brows  shaded  ivith  the  civic  oaTc ;  they  shall  not  only  be  distinguished  for 
warlike  deeds,  but  they  shall  plant  cities,  and  thus  win  the  civic  crown  of 
oak  leaves ;  for  the  corona  civilis  or  civica  is  here  the  token  of  services  ren 
dered  to  the  state  in  the  arts  of  peace,  though  commonly  the  reward  be- 
stowed  by  the  Romans  upon  a  soldier  who  had  saved  the  life  of  a  comrade 

in  battle. TT3.  Koracntiini,  and  the  other  proper  names  in  this  verse  are 

governed  by  some  verb  like  condent  suggested  by  the  following  imponent. 

Nomentum  is  now  la  Mentana  in  the  Sabine  country. Clbii ;  an  ancient 

town  of  Latium,  traces  of  which  are  said  to  be  found  near  Castiglione. 

FidCDam,  (more  commonly  used  in  the  plural,  Fidenae  ;)  a  Latin  town  in  the 
valley  of  the  Tiber,  between  Rome  and  Yeii,  and  near  the  modern  Castel 

Giubileo. TT4.  Collatinas  arccs ;  the  battlements  ofCollatia;  a  town  on 

the  hills  between  the  road  to  Praeneste  and  the  left  bank  of  the  Anio ;  now 

Castellaccio. TT5.  Pometios ;   Pometii ;    another  form  for  Pometia,   or 

Suessa  Pometia,  a  Yolscian  town.     Some  take  Pometii  as  another  form  for 

Pometini. Castrnm  Inni ;  a  town  of  the  Rutuli  on  the  sea-coast  near  Ar- 

dea.     Bola  was  a  town  of  the  Aequi,  near  the  Anio.     Cora,  now  Cori,  is 

situated  on  the  hills  south-east  of  Velitri. TT7.   Yea  more,  Pomidvs  the 

son  of  3fars  sh-all  accon^pany  his  grandsire  ;  that  shade  destined  to  be  Rom- 
xdus  shaU  go  into  the  upper  world,  while  his  grandsire  Xumitor  shaU  be  stiU 
living,  and  shall  be  associated  with  him  in  the  royal  dignity.  Quin  et  calls 
attention  to  a  cireumstance  still  more  striking  than  the  foregoing,  namely, 

the  advent  of  Romulus. TT8.  Assaraei  sangninis ;  of  Trojan  blood;  joia 

■with  Flia.     Assaraci  is  here  used  adjectively.     For  the  prince  of  that  name, 

Eee  on  i.  284. TT9.  Viden'  (videsne)  is  affirmative ;  do  you  see  ?  you  doubt- 

!es«  see.     Gr.  §  198,  11,  (c) ;  Z.  §  352. Ut  stant ;  the  indicative  is  sorae- 

times  used  by  the  poets  in  dependent  questions.     Gr.  §  205,  R.  1 ;  Z.  §  553. 

Gcnilaae  cilstae ;  a  double  crest,  or  plume  faUing  both  ovcr  the  front 

and  back  of  the  Iielmet,  was  often  worn  by  warriors,  and  was  attributed  to 
Mars,  as  also  here  to  Romulus,  indicating  the  glory  he  was  destined  to  at- 

tain  in  arms. TSO.  And  (how)  the  father  of  the  gods  himself  alrcady 

viarls  (b.im)  vnth  his  pcculiar  honor ;  with  the  tokens  of  martial  glory  due 


532 


NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 


to  him.     Suo  refers  to  the  objcci,  Romulum  or  cum,  understood ;  comp.  iii, 
4C9,  494;  and  pater  rcfers  to  Jupiter.     Others  uaderstand  both  pater  and 

s2<o  ofMars. 781.  Ilojns  auspidis  ;  under  his  auspices  ;  Rome  commenc- 

ing  her  existencc  under  the  auspices  of  Romulus,  and  continuing  to  advance 

and  prosper  undcr  his  protection  after  his  deification. 782.  Aiiiinos  ;  her 

heroism ;  her  heroic  men.     Rome  will  produce  men  equal  to  the  gods  {Olym' 
po)  iu  greatness  of  soul.     Others  translate  animos,  her  lofty  spirit,  referriug 

it  to  Rome  herself,  as  a  person. 783.  Sibi ;  datimis  commodi.     And  (be- 

iug)  one  (city),  though  one  city,  she  shall  surround  scvcn  hills  vnth  a  xvall. 

Septem  and  ima  are  contrasted. 784.    Bcrecyntia;    an  appellative  of 

Cybele,  from  the  Phrygian  Mount  Berecyiitus,  whcre  she  was  worshipped 
with  peculiar  honors. 785.  Turrita ;  croumcd  with  towers. 


Cybcle,  Corybantcs,  aiid  Iho  infaut  Juintcr. 

786.  Partn;  for  the  caso  sce  on  fcqmine,  i.  215. 790.  Magnnin 

snb  axcm  ;  tcp  to  thc  preat  vault ;  i.  e.  into  tlie  uppcr  workl.     But  sonie  re- 

fer  it  to  Olympus  itself,  and  to  thc  dcification  of  the  Caesars. 791.  Hic ; 

for  tiie  quantity  of  tliis  pronoun  sce  Gr.  g  299,  c.xc.  2. Sncpins.     See  on 

tristior,  i.  223. 79J.  Angnstas  ;  tliis  titlo  twis  bcstowed  upon  Octavian  by 

a  docrcc  of  the  senate  in  B.  C.  27. Dlvi  gcnns  ;  ihc  progeny  of  a  dcity  ; 


BOOK  SIXTH.  533 

Augustus  was  the  adopted  son  of  Julius  Caesar,  ■who  ■was  regarded  as  a  god 

after  his  death. T93.  Latio ;  in  Latium ;  the  ablative  of  situation. 

794.  Satarno ;  dative  of  the  agent  after  regnata ;  the  reign  of  Saturn  was 
the  golden  age.     Augustus  is  destined  to  establish  (condet)  a  second  golden 

age,  or  age  of  peace  and  happiness,  in  Italy.    Comp.  i.  291. 194.  Saper; 

beyond. Garamantas.    See  on  iv.  198. ^795-T97.  Jacet — aptnni;  the 

land  which  he  shall  conquer  beyond  the  Garamantes  and  the  Indi  is  situated 
beyond  the  constellations  (sidera)  of  the  zodiac ;  that  is,  south  of  the  zodiac, 
and  beyondthe  course  of  the  year  and  of  the  suu;  or  south  of  the  tropics, 
— even  beyond  the  region  where  sky-bearing  Atlas  turns  on  his  shoulder 
the  heavens  studded  with  burning  stars.  The  conquests  of  Augustus  scarce- 
ly  indeed  extended  to  the  tropic  of  Cancer ;  but  to  the  Romans  and  to  Vir- 
gil,  with  their  limited  knowledge  of  the  globe,  the  language  here  used  would 
not  seera  exaggerated;  for  to  their  imaginations  the  Indus,  the  Libyan 
desert,  and  Mount  Atlas,  were  the  boundaries  of  the  southern  hemisphere. 

797.    See  the  same  verse,  iv.  482. T98.   Caspla  rcgna;  Caspian 

Jcingdoms;  those  of  the  Bactrians  and  Hyrcanians,  who  with  the  Parthians 

stood  in  awe  of  the  power  of  Augustus. Maeotia  tcllns ;  the  country 

about  i\xe  palus  Maeotis,  or  sea  of  Azof,  inhabited  by  the  warlike  Scythians. 

800.  Tnrbant ;  used  reflexively ;  trouhle  themselves,  are  trouhled.     Gr. 

§  229,  R.  4;  Z.  §  145.  Even  now,  in  the  time  of  Aeneas,  there  are  pro- 
phetic  warnings,  relating  to  the  conquests  of  Augustus,  which  cause  terror 
among  the  nations  of  Asia  and  Africa.  It  was  a  common  notion  that  super- 
natural  portents  preceded  the  advent  of  great  conquerors ;  and  some  such 
signs  were  said  to  have  occurred  before  the  birth  of  Augustus.  But  Yirgil 
imagines  that  they  were  foreshadowed  even  centuries  before.  The  terms 
septemplex,  septemjltiua,  and  septemgeminus,  are  applied  to  the  Xile  to  indi- 
cate  the  seven  mouths  by  which  it  discharges  itself  into  the  Mediterranean. 
The  Danube  in  like  manner  is  called  by  Ovid,  Trist.  ii.  189,  septemplex  Ister. 

801.  JSfor  indeed  did  Hercules  visit  so  much  of  the  earth.    Augustus 

made  journeys  as  well  as  military  expeditions  to  the  remotest  parts  of  his 
great  empire  in  order  to  quell  insurrections,  put  down  the  remnant  of  foreign 
enemies,  and  estabhsh  good  government  and  quiet.  In  accomplishing  this 
object  he  visited  as  many  lands  as  Hercules  in  performing  his  labors,  or  as 

Bacchus  in  his  eastern  conquests. 802.  Fixerit  licct ;  though  he  pierced, 

or  ivoicnded.    According  to  the  received  tradition  the  stag  was  taken  alive ; 

though  in  Euripides,  Herc.  Furens,  378,  it  is  said  to  have  been  slain. 

Acripedem ;   the  famous  stag  of  Ceryneia  in  Arcadia,  which  had  golden 

horns  and  brazen    hoofs. Lrcet;    even   though  he  wandered  over  thc 

world  so  far  as  to  achieve  these  and  all  his  other  labors ;  for  the  mode  after 

licet,  see  Gr.  §  263,  2,  (1);  Z.  §  5*74. 803.  Pacarit  (pacaverit)  ncmora; 

Hercules  captured  aUve  the  wild  boar  of  the  woods  of  Erymanthus,  and  car- 

ried  him  to  Mycenae.     Thus  he  secured  quiet  to  the  woods. ^Lernam  j 

the  district  of  Lerna  -itself  was  terrified  with  the  conflict  between  Hercules 
ind  the  Hydra. 804.  Pampineis;  loreathed  xoith  vinc  tendrils. ^Jnga 


534  NOTES   ON    THE    AENEID. 

fleetit;  guides  his  team;  liis  "yoke"  of  tigers. 805.  Liber;  an  ancient 

Italian  deity,  rcgarded  in  later  times  as  identical  with  Bacchus.  Nysa 
was  a  city  of  India,  the  name  of  which  was  also  applied  to  Mount  Meros,  on 
which  it  was  said  to  have  been  built  by  Bacchus.  Tiius  Augustus  is  lauded 
by  Yirgil,  first,  for  estabhshing  peace,  secondly,  for  his  conqucsts,  and  last, 

for   his   expeditions   and   "  progresscs." 806.  Dabitamns ;  do  we  hesi- 

tate  ?  the  first  person  plural,  as  in  i.  252,  dcnotes  the  deep  interest  of  the 

parent,  identifying  himself  with  Aeneas. Adiine;  still ;  any  longer?  im- 

plying  some  degree  of  reproach  for  the  backwardness  of  Aeneas  in  the  en- 

terprise. Virtatem  extendere  factis ;  to  advance  our  glory  by  our  deeds ; 

by  conquering  Latium.     Virtutem  is  equivalent  to  gloriam  viriute  partam. 

For  the  injinitive  here,  see  Gr.  §  262,  note  8 ;  Z.  §  641. 80T.     For  the 

infinitive  ahcT  prohibet,  see  Gr.  §  262,  R.  11,  note;  Z.  §  544. 808.  Quis 

procal  ?  The  language  is  still  that  of  Anchises,  the  question  either  indicat- 
ing  some  uncertainty  for  the  moment  about  the  personage  he  is  looking  al, 

or  else  serving  to  break  up  the  monotony  of  the  narrative. 809.  Sacra 

ferens  ;  bearing  sacrijicial  instruments  ;  a  symbol  of  priesthood. Incana; 

ahnost  gray ;  from  incanesco.     So  Gossrau ;  but  Thiel  and  others  translate 

by  valde  cana. 810.    Primus ;   Romulus  was  the  military  founder  of 

Rome ;  Numa  was  the  first  to  establish  its  society  on  the  basis  of  civil  and 
religious  laws.     Primam  instead  otprimus  is  adopted  by  Wagner  and  othera 

on  the  authority  of  many  good  manuscripts. 811.  Cnribns;  Cures,  now 

Correse,  in  the  Sabine  country,  east  of  Rome. Terra ;  estate,  or  farm. 

■ 8!4.  Tnllas ;  TuIIus  Hostilius,  the  third  king  of  Rome,  whom  Livy,  i. 

22,  calls  even  more  impetuous  than  Romulus,  roused  the  city  from  the  peace- 

ful  habits  established  by  Numa. 815.  Jactantior ;  too  aspiring.     Ancus 

Martius,  the  grandson  of  Xuma,  was  gcnerally  remembered  as  the  good 
king,  the  friend  of  the  plebeians.  Virgil  adopts  a  less  favorable  view  of  his 
character.  An  early  commentator,  Pomponius  Sabinus,  quoted  by  Heyne, 
makes  the  following  remark:  Ancus  Martius,  who  prided  himself  on  his 
regal  hneage,  felt  much  aggrieved  by  the  election  of  Tullus  in  prcfcrence  to 
himself,  and  did  not  conceal  his  discontent  even  during  the  reign  of  TuUus. 
He  even  went  so  far  as  to  seek  the  favor  of  thc  people  (gaudens  popularibus 

auris)  as  a  means  of  dcstroying  the  reigning  king  and  his  whole  family. 

817.  Snpcrbam  ;  lofty,  noblc. 818.  1'ltoris ;  Brutus,  in  overthrowing  the 

Tarquins,  was  thc  avengcr  of  thc  wrongs  of  Lucrctia  and  of  the  Romau  peo- 

ple. Fasccs.     Sec  page.60(). Receptos  ;  not,  as  in  i.  178,  recovercd, 

but  received;  i.  e.  taken  from  thc  expclled  Tarquins  by  the  ncwly  creatcd 

niiigistrates  or  consuls,  of  whom  Brutus  was  the  first. 820.  Moventcs ; 

the  two  sons  of  Brutus  engaged  iu  a  conspiracy  to  restore  the  Tarquins,  aud 
were  scourgcd  and  beheadcd  in  the  prescnce  of  thcir  fathcr,  who  prcsidcd 

at  the  trial  and  execution  as  chief  magistrate.     See  Liv.  ii.  6. 822.  MI- 

nores;  posterity;  future  generatioiis. Utcamqnc,  howsoever,  implics  that 

in  after  times  thcre  was  a  difiference  of  opinion  as  to  thc  conduct  of  Brutus 
on  this  occasion. 823.  Vlncet;  his  love  of  country  and  desire  of  appro- 


BOOK    SIXTH.  535 

bation  shall  coiiquv.r  his  parental  lore. 82i.  Deeios ;  the  Decii,  fathei 

and  son,  belonged  to  the  niost  lieroic  period  of  the  Roman  rcpublic.  They 
"  devoted  themselves  "  for  the  prescrvation  and  victory  of  thc  Roman  army ; 
the  father  in  the  battle  against  the  Latins  near  Jfount  Vesuvius,  B.  C.  340 ; 

the  son  iu  the  battle  of  Sentinum,  B.  C.  295. Drasos  ;  the  most  conspicu- 

ous  of  the  Drusi,  before  the  time  of  Augustus,  was  M.  Livius  Drusus  SaUua- 
tor,  who  won  the  great  and  decisive  battle  against  HaSdrubal  on  the  Metau- 

rus  in  B.  C.  20*7. SaevTUn  ;  Torquatus,  consul  with  the  first  Decius,  above 

mentioned,  caused  his  sou  to  be  put  to  death  for  engaging  in  a  single  combat 

coatrary  to  his  orders. 825.  Referentem  signa  ;  bringing  back  the  stand- 

ards;  Camillus,  by  dcfeating  the  Gauls,  recovered  the  standards  which  they 

had  previously  taken  at  the  battle  on  the  Allia,  B.  C.  390. 826.  Illac ; 

Pompey  and  Caesar. Fnlgere;  hcre  of  the  tJdrd  conjugation. 827. 

Nocte ;  the  lower  world,  though  Elysium  has  its  owu  sun,  is  night  or  dark- 
ness  in  contrast  with  the  upper  world,  to  which  the  term  liix  is  applied, 

above,  '721,  et  al. 830.     Caesar,  the  father-in-Iaw  of  Pompey,  came  from 

his  Gallic  conquests  to  engage  in  the  civil  war  agaiast  his  son-in-law. Ag- 

geribns;  from  the  bulwarks ;  for  the  Alps  raay  be  called  the  ramparts  of 

Italy. Monoeci ;  the  height  of  Monoecus,  a  promontory  of  the  Maritime 

Alps,  so  called  from  the  temple  of  Hercules  Monoecus,  which  stood  there. 

831.     The  troops  of  Pompey  at  Pharsalus  were,  for  the  most  part,  le- 

gions  which  had  been  acting  iu  the  eastern  provinces,  assisted  by  allies  un- 

der  the  command  of  Asiatic  kings. 833.  Patriae  in  viscera ;  against  the 

vitals  of  ycur  country.     Hor.  Ep.  16,  2 :  Suis  et  ipsa  Roma  viribus  ruit. 

834.  Tuqne  prior ;  Caesar  did  in  fact  manifest  a  disposition  to  forbear,  and 
to  prevent  the  impending  war.     See  Merivale's  Fall  of  the  Koman  Republic, 

ch.  xi.  at  the  end. 834.  Olympo ;  Caesar  is  descended  from  lulus,  and, 

therefore,  from  Venus  and  Jupiter. 836.  Ille ;   Lucius  Mummius,  who 

conquered  and  destroyed  Corinth,  B.  C.  146. Corintbo  ;  ablat.  absol. 

with  triumphata. 838.  Ille ;  L.  AemiUus  Paulus,  the  couqueror  of  the 

Macedonian  king,  Perseus,  is  probably  meant. ^Argos  and  Mycenas  are 

put  for  the  whole  of  Greece.     Comp.  i.  284,  285. 839.  Aeacldcn  ;  proba- 

bly  Perseus  is  meant ;  for  the  Macedonian  kings  derived  their  hueage 
through  Olympias,  the  daughter  of  Neoptolemus,  from  Achilles,  the  grand- 

Bon  of  Aeacus. 840.  Templa  temerata  Mineryae ;  the  violated  shrines  of 

Minerva.     See  on  i.  41. 841.  Cato;  the  elder  Cato,  or  Cato  the  Censor, 

distinguished  as  a  soldier,  statesman,  aud  writer,  died  B.  C.  149. Cossc  ; 

A.  Cornelius  Cossus,  as  consul  aud  commander,  B.  C.  428,  killed  in  battle 
Lars  Tolumnius,  king  of  Veii,  aud  bore  in  triumph  the  spolia  opima  to  the 
temple  of  Mars.  This  honor  happened  ouly  to  two  besides  Cossus  in  the 
whole  period  of  Roman  history ;  Romulus  obtained  the  spolia  opiina  from 
Acron  king  of  Caenina,  and  dedicated  them  to  Jupiter ;  Marcellus  won  them 
from  Viridomarus,  king  of  the  Insubrian  Gauls,  and  dcdicated  them  to 

Quirinus.     See  below,  859. 842.  Graccbi  genns ;  the  most  illustrious  of 

■ihe  Gracchi  were,  Sempronius  Gracchus,  tribune  and  consul,  who  defcuded 


536  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

the  elder  Scipio  Africanus  frora  the  attacks  of  Cato  ;  and  his  two  sons,  Tibe. 
rius  and  Caius  Gracchus,  who  lost  their  lives  in  their  vain  struggle  to  ame- 

liorate  the  condition  of  the  plebeian  order  at  Roine 843.  Scipiadas; 

Cicero  (pro  Balbo,  15)  calls  the  brothers  Cncius  and  Publius  Scipio,  who  fell 
in  the  campaigns  in  Spain  against  Hasdrubal,  duo  fuhnina  nostri  imperii; 
the  reference  here,  however,  is  to  Scipio  Africanus  Major,  who  closed  the 
sccond  Punic  ■war  by  dcfeating  Hannibal  at  Zama,  and  Scipio  Africanua 
Minor,  who  captured  and  destroyed  Carthnge  iu  the  third  Punic  war.     The 

lattcr  was  the  son  of  Aemilius  Paulus,  and  a  Scipio  only  by  adoption. 

813.  Parvo  potcntemj  rich  in  poverty ;  poiens  often  siguifies  opulentns; 
parvo  is  used  substantively,  and  the  ablative  denotes  situation.  Fabricius, 
though  poor,  was  wholly  uninfluenced  by  the  oflfered  bribes  of  Pyrrhus. 

See  Liddeirs  Hist.  of  Rome,  3,  26,  9. 844.  Serrane  5  Caius  Atilius  Regu- 

lus,  consul  in  B.  C.  25*7,  surnamed  Serranus,  beoause  when  his  election  was 
announced  lie  was  found  cultivating  his  land,  or  plantijig  in  the  furrow,  sulco 
serentem.  He  gained  a  naval  victory  over  the  Carthaginians  near  the  Liparae- 
an  islands.  He  was  also  consul  in  B.  C.  250,  the  year  when  his  still  more 
celebratcd  namcsakc,  the  captive  Reguhis,  came  from  Carthage  on  his  mission 

to  the  Roraan  senate  for  the  exchange  of  prisoners. 845.  Maxlmns  5  this 

"was  an  appellation  of  many  of  the  Fabii.  The  one  here  referred  to  retrieved 
the  fortunes  of  Rome,  after  the  great  disaster  at  Lake  Trasimenus,  by  keep- 
ing  the  field  with  a  Roman  army,  and  yet  avoiding  any  general  engagement. 

846.    A  verse  borrowed  from  Ennius. 84T.   Spiraatia  aera;    the 

breathing  bronze ;  life-hke  statues  of  bronze. MoUins ;  it  is  one  of  the 

triumphs  of  the  sculptor's  art  to  make  the  bronze  or  marblc  imitate  the  soft 
outhnes  of  the  human  form.     Thus  Cicero  (Brut.  18)  says:   Calamidis  dura 

illa  (signa)  quidem,  sed  tamen  mollioua  quam  Canachi. 849.  Orabnnt 

cansas  melins ;  Roman  oratory  in  the  time  of  Virgil  had  attained  to  an  ex- 
cellence  which  might  well  vie  with  that  of  the  Athenians ;  but  here  the 
great  national  distinction  of  the  Romans,  their  greatness  as  warriors  and 
conquerors,  is  to  be  presented  as  contrasted  with  those  arts  which  charac- 

terize  thc  Greeks. Coeli  mcatas ;  the  movcments  of  the  hcavenly  bodies. 

850.  Radio ;  with  thc  ivand;  the  astronomer  drew  his  diagram  with  a 

rod  on  wct  sand  spread  upon  a  table. 852.  Morem ;  the  terins,  or  co7i- 

ditions. 855.  Marcellns ;  thc  grcat  Marcellus  of  the  sccond  Punic  war, 

who  obtained  the  third  spolia  opima,  (see  above,  on  841,)  and  was  thc  first 
Roraan  general  who  gavc  a  dccidcd  chcck  to  Hannibal.  Thc  mcntion  of 
tliis  grcat  commander  leads  to  the  following  allusion  to  his  dcsccndant,  the 
youthful  Marccllus,  son  of  Octavia,  and  adoptcd  son  of  Augustus,  whose  un- 
tiincly  dcath  caused  universal  grief  araong  the  Romans.  Uis  dcath  occurrcd 
in  B.  C.  2".,  while  Virgil  was  engaged  in  thc  composition  of  thc  Acucid.— — 
802.  Laeta  parnm  ;  cquivalcnt  to  tristior  ;  too  sad  for  a  youth.  Tho  shado 
is  faiicied  to  havc  alrcady  a  forecast  of  his  brief  hfe  in  the  world  above.  « 
Dcjecto  Inmina  Ynltn;  cyes  of  downcast  look;  for  the  ablat.  scc  Gr.  §  211, 
R.  C ;  Z.  §  471. 863.  Qnis ;  Aeneas  wishcs  lo  learu  the  name  of  the  pcr- 


BOOK   SIXTH.  537 

son ;  qui  would  be  used  if  tlie  character  or  quality  wcrc  the  subjcct  of  the 

inquiry. Virnm;  i.  e.  the  elder  Marcellus. Sic  ;  thus ;  as  described 

in  the  words  foregoing ;  arrayed  in  glittering  arms,  noble  in  appcarance, 

and  yet  sad  and  dejected. 864.  Filins  ;  (is  it)  his  son  ? Anne  ;  — ne  is 

appended  to  an  without  affecting  its  meaning.     See  Gr.  §  198,  11,  R.  (d); 

Z.  §  351. Aliqais;  some  one;  not  here  alius  quis. 865.  Strcpitns 

the  alhision  is  to  the  large  retinue  of  friends  and  clients  attending  him,  and 
to  the  crowds  saluting  him  -ivhen  seen  in  public  at  Rome.  Already  the 
epirits  in  Elysium  in  anticipation  seem  to  bestow  similar  honors  upon  him. 

• QaaDtam  instar  ia  ipso  ;  ivhat  majesti/ {there  is)  i7i  him!  equivalent  to 

quantae  rei  instar  in  ipso  ;  the  image  of  how  much  greatness  is  thcre  in  (the 
youth)  himself.  Ipso  is  in  contrast  with  comitiim.  Others  translate,  how 
much   resemblajice  there  is  in  tbe  youth  himself  to  the  great  Marcellus! 

866.  Bfox  atra  ;  the  dark  night  of  death.     Night  hovers  about  him,  cast- 

ing  the  shadow  of  her  wings  upon  his  forehead,  and  thus  prefiguring  hi.s 

early  death. 86T.  Ingressns;  supply  dicere ;  as  iv.  lOY.- 870.  Esse  ; 

to  exist  or  live. 871.  Propria ;  enduring,  ov  permanent.     Comp.  i.  73. 

872.    What  lamentalions  of  citizens  will  thatfeld  near  the  great  city  of 

Mars  give  utterance  to!  Virum,  as  in  i.  440,  oOY.  The  whole  populace  was 
assembled  on  the  Campus  Martius  at  the  fuueral  of  Marcellus.  His  remains 
were  deposited  in  the  splendid  mausoleum  of  Augustus  on  the  bank  of  the 

Tiber. 875.  Pttcr  qnisqnam.     Gr.  §  207,  E.  31,  (c);  Z.  §  676. 87G. 

Eomnla;  iov  Romidca. 878.  Heu,  etc. ;  these  words  convey  this  sentiment: 

alas  that  his  piety,  his  faith,  worth}'  of  the  golden  age,  and  his  warlike  spirit, 

are  destined  to  so  brief  a  period  for  their  display. 879-881.     The  sub- 

junctive  here  denotes  that  Marcellus  would  have  achieved  much  had  the 

fates  permitted  him  to  live. 882.   Si  qaa.     See  on  i.  18. 883.  Ta 

Marccllns  eris;  if  you  can  but  overcome  the  cruel  decrees  of  fate,  so  as  to 
live  longer  on  earth,  you  will  fully  prove  to  the  world  by  your  actual 
achievements  all  the  greatncss  that  is  inherent  ia  your  character ;  you  will 
be  all  that  Marcellus  of  which  the  Roman  world  shall  form  such  high  espec- 
tations  from  your  youthful  promise  ;  you  will  be  not  only  the  young  Mar- 
cellus,  but  the   Marcellus  which  you  are  capable  of  bccoming  in  m.ature 

manhood,  in  public  life,  and  in  military  fame. Date  lilia ;  Anchises  is 

transported  by  his  emotion  to  the  scene  which  shall  transpire  centuries 
hence,  and  to  the  tomb  itself,  and  imagines  himself  scattering  flowers  upon 

it. 884.     Comp.  v.  79. 885,  886.  laani  mancre;  a  vain  office ;  vain, 

because  the  dead  receives  no  benefit  from  it. 887.  Acris ;  according  to 

*aiost  commentators  the  genitive  here  limits  campis ;  in  the  tcide  fields  of 
air ;  not  literally  in  the  air,  howcver,  but  in  the  ample  airy  fields  or  grounds 
of  Elysium,  described  abovc,  640,  largior  hic  campos  aethcr,  etc.     This  is 

the  natural  interpretation.,    Others  join  aeris  with  regione. 888.  Qaae 

postq.  pcr  singnla ;  and  when  tJirough  thcse  objects  one  after  another. 

890.  Exia  ;  iovexinde ;  then  or  thereupon ;  answering  here  to  the  foregoing 

23* 


538 


NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 


postguam.— — 802.  Qno  qncmqne  modo.   Comp.  iii.  459. 803-S9C.    Ttiis 

descriptiou  of  two  gates  by  which  visions  asccnd  to  the  upper  world  is  de- 
rived  by  Virgil  frora  the  Odyssey,  xix.  562-56'7.  It  is  inserted  hefe  by  the 
poet,  interrupting  for  a  moment  the  regular  narrative,  iu  order  to  explain 

beforehand  the  expression  porta  eburna,  which  is  to  follow. Ycris  um- 

bris ;  to  real  shades ;  actual  ghosts  of  the  dead  which  appear  to  men  in 

dreams  and  visions  of  the  night.     Comp.  iv.  386. ^Falsa ;  but  (by  this 

ivory  gsite)  t/ie  3fanes  send  false  visions  to  tJie  upper  world  {caelurn.)  The 
infernal  powers  send  up  unreal  and  deceptive  phantoms  to  mislead  men. 

89T-899.     Translate  'the  passage  thus :    then,  when  Anchises  has  ad- 

dressed  (addresses)  Aeneas  and  the  Sibyl  in  these  tvords,  (the  words  giveu  iu 
the  forcgoing  instructions,)  and  has  sent  thcm  forth  by  the  ivory  gate,  he 
(Aeneas)  .ipceds  his  way  to  the  ships  and  joins  ayain  his  comjmnions.  An- 
chiscs  conducts  Aeneas  and  the  Sibyl  to  tho  ivory  gate  a»44io  onowhioh 
aS^d*  the^a?ieet  and  qtriiAest-aseent-  te-th>e  •oippec  world.  They  are  thus 
saved  the  toil  of  reascending  by  the  way  they  came,  which,  according  to 
the  words  of  the  Sibyl,  128,  129,  would  have  been  a  work  of  great  labor. 

Tom  connccts  this  sentence  back  to  verse  892 ;  the  narrative  having 

been  interrupted  by  the  description  of  the  two  gates. Prosequitor  aud 

emittit  are  iu  the  present  for  the  perfect  after  ubi,  liko  vSnit  after  quum,  i. 

697. 900.  Ciiictae  ;  now  Gaeta,  on  the  coast  between  Naples  and  Terra- 

cinu. Rcctolimitc;  in  a  direct  course.     Wagner  prefers  the  more  usual 

reading,  rccto  litorc,  which  may  be  rendered,  dircclhj  aloncj  the  shorc. 


riuto  aii'l  Proporpine. 


BOOK    SEVENTH. 


539 


Tlie  Trojau  camp  on  the  Tiber. 


BOOK  VII. 

Arrival  of  Aeueas  in  Latium,  and  commencement  of 
hostilities  between  the  Latins  and  Trojans. 

1-36.  Aeneas  buries  his  nurse  on  a  promontory  of  Latium,  ■which  he  names  after 
her,  Caieta.  He  then  eails  by  the  promontory  of  Circeium,  the  abode  of  the  sorcereBS 
Circe,  enters  the  mouth  of  tho  Tiber,  and  disemharks  on  the  Laurcntine  bank  of  the 
river. 

It  Tu  qaoqne ;  ihou  aho ;  as  well  as  Misenus  and  Palinurus.     Sce  vi. 

232,  381.     The  place  where  Caieta  was  buried  is  now  called  Gaeta. Z» 

liwas,\  noio;  even  in  the  poefs  times. Sedem;  iov  sepulcruin.     The  pas- 

sage  may  be  rendered,  and  even  noio  thy  honored  name  keeps  thy  resting- 
place  (in  memory,)  and  the  designatlon  marks  thy  ashes.  The  name  of  the 
place,  Caieta,  is  the  honos ;  this  preserves  the  memory  of  her  burial-place. 

Ossaqae  nomen  signat  more  distinctly  expresses  the  idea  contaiued  in 

servat  honos  sedem. 10.  Circaeae  tcrrae }  the  promontory  of  Circeiura,  on 

the  coast  of  Latium,  called  in  iii.  386,  insula  Circae.     Homer,  Od.  x.  135, 

designated  the  dwelling-place  of  Circe  as  an  island. 11,  Solis  filia  ;  Circe. 

11,  12.  Lncos  resonat;  makes  the  groves  resound.     Thc  verb  is  used 

iransitively.    Comp.  sonat,  bclow,  84. 13.  Noctnrna  in  Inmina ;  to  illu- 

minate  the  night ;  ior  nocturnal  lights ;  t«  denoting  an  object  or  end. 


540 


NOTES   ON    THE    AENEID. 


15.   Exandiri;    liistorical   infinitive. 18.   Formae  Inpornm;   for  lu}A. 

Conip.  V.  822. 20.  Terga  ferarnm.    Comp.  i.  635. 21.  Qnae  monstra 

talia  \  such  fearful  transformations  as  these  ;  literally,  u-hich  such  prodigies. 

27.  Posucrc ;  supply  se;  were  cahned.     Comp.  x.  103. 28.  Tonsae ; 

the  oars;    arbores  is  understood. 33.  AIVCO ;  pronounced  bcre   alu-yo. 

For  the  case,  see  Gr.  §  245,  ii.  3. 35.  Flectere;  instead  oi  ut  flectant. 

37-44.  Second  invocation  to  the  muse,  at  the 
opening  of  the  Bccond  grand  division  of  Ihe 
poem,  which  describes  the  battles  of  the  Tro- 
jans  and  Italians,  under  Aeneas  and  TumuB. 

37.  Regcs ;  such  as  Latinus,  Turnus, 

and  Mezentius. Erato ;  the  name  of  one 

of  the  muses  for  thc  general  term  muse. 

So  often  Calliope,  Melpomene,  &c. 

Tempora  rernm  ;  circumstances ;  supply 
fuerlnt.     For  the  mode,  see  Gr.  §  265 ; 

Z.  §  504. 39.   Exercitns;   squadron; 

the  real  sense  seems  to  be  the  body  of 
nien  on  board  the  ships,  destined  to  form 
tlie  army  on  land. 42.  Actos  animis ; 


iinpclled  by  passion. 


-45.  Qloyeo;  i 


cnter  upon.     Comp.  i.  262. 

45-106.  Latinus,  the  king  of  Latium,  had  an 
only  daughter,  -whom  his  queen,  Amata,  had 
destined  for  the  haud  of  Turnus,  chief  of  the 
Rutulians.  But  hefore  the  anival  of  the  Tro- 
jans,  Latinua  had  been  warncd  by  the  oracle 
at  Albunoa  that  his  daughter  was  to  laariy  a 
foreign  prince. 

46.    Eegebat ;    had  been  ruling. 

47.  FJinno ;  a  deified  prince  of  ancient 
Latium,  regarded  as  a  god  of  shepherds, 
as  well  as  a  god  of  prophecy.  He  was 
identified  by  the  Greeks  and  later  Ro- 

mans  ■with  the  Grecian  Pan. Marlca ; 

a  i'ivcr  nymph  who  was  worshipped  as 
llie  guardian  deity  of  the  Liris,  ncar  Minturnae.  She  is  here  called  Laurcn- 
tian,  or  Latian,  because  Latium  was  bounded  at  one  pcriod  by  the  Liris. 

18.  Accipimns ;  we  leam  by  tradiiion ;  and  no  doubt  this  is  a  gcnuiue 

Itulian  tradition,  unmixed  with  the  fablcs  of  the  Greeks,  which  confounded 
Saturnus,  Faunus,  Mavors,  and  othcr  Italian  dcitics  with  their  Krono.':,  Pan, 

Ares,  &c. 51.  Prlmaqne — est ;   but  he  {virilis  proles)  when  grovnng  vp 

teas  snatchid  away  in  early  youth.     — que  has  hcre  the  forcc  of  "  and  in- 

deed,"  or  "  but." 52.  Tantas  scdcs ;  so  grcat  a  Icingdom. Filla  ;  La- 

vinia. 56.  BcglA  conjnx;  Amata. 50.   Lanrns;   as  in  the  palace  of 


Krato. 


BOOK   SEVENTH.  541 

Priam.    Sec  ii.  512  sq. 68.  Externnm ;  as  the  bees  had  come  through 

the  air,  trans  aethcra,  and  not  from  the  immediate  neighborhood,  the  ar- 
rival  of  foreigners  was  portcnded ;  as  they  had  settled  upon  the  summit  of 
the  sacred  laurel,  this  indicated  the  occupation  of  the  palace  and  kingdom 

by  the  strangers. 69.  Partes  easdeni ;   the  same  quarter  to  which  the 

bees  have  directed  their  course. 70.  Dominarier.    Gr.  §  162,  6  ;  Z.  §  162. 

74.  Ornatum,  c omas,  coronam ;  in  respect  to  her  apparel,  &c.    See  on 

oculos,  i.  228. 77.  Vukannm ;  fire;   as  in  ii.  311. ^78.  Ferri;  was 

noised  abroad. 79.  Canebant;  they  (i.  e.  the  prophets) /o«<oW. 80. 

Portendcre;  it  portended. 81.   Oracnla  Fanni.    The  oracle  of  the  pro- 

phetic  Faunus  was  in  a  grove  near  the  fountain  of  Albunea,  a  deified 
prophetess,  to  whom  a  sulphurous  fountain  had  been  consecrated  near 
Tibur,  or  Tivoli.     The  name  is  applied  both  to  the  nymph  and  the  fountain. 

82,  83.  Snb  alta  Albnnca ;  under  the  height  from  which  the  fountain  of 

Albunea  descended. 83,  84.  Ncmornm— sonat ;  which  maJces  great  woods 

resound  with  her  sacred  fountain.  In  this  translation,  which  corresponds  to 
that  of  Ladewig,  maxima  nemorum  is  a  partitive  expression  for  maxima 
nemora,  governed  by  sonat  as  a  transitive  verb  ;  a  mode  of  disposing  of  the 
paseage,  at  least,  as  satisfactory  as  any  which  has  been  proposed.  The  last 
explanation  of  Heyue,  approved  by  Forbiger,  makes  maxima  in  apposition 
with  guae,  and  supplies  aquarum;  thus :  Albunca,  which,  greatest  of  the 

waters  (streams)  of  the  icoods,  resounds  with  its  sacred  fountain. Mcplii- 

tim ;  the  noxious  cxhalation  rising  from  the  sulphurous  fountain,  as  at  the 
present  day  from  the  Solfatara  di  Tivoli,  probably  suggested  thc  idea  of 

some  deity  presiding  over  the  place. 87.  C^num  tulit— incnbnit.     This  is 

a  general  account  of  the  manner  in  which  this  oracle  gave  the  desired  infor- 
mation;  which  was  by  visions  and  voices,  revealed  to  the  priest,  while 
sleeping  on  the  hides  of  the  victims  previously  slain  in  sacrifice.  lu  the 
present  instance  Latinus  acted  as  priest  himself ;  for  in  Latium  the  priestly 

office  was  a  royal  prerogative. 91.  Acheronta;  Acheron;  forthepowera 

of  the  lower  world. Avernis;   in  Hades. 92.    Ipsc;    not   as  usual 

through  the  priest,  but  himself  in  person  consulting  the  oracle. 96.  Con- 

nubiis  ;  con-nu-hyis. 97.  Mca.    The  voice  is  that  of  Faunus,  the  ancestor 

of  Latinus. 98,  99.  Qui  ferant ;   such  as  shall  bear ;  for  tales  ut  smi 

laturi. 

107-147.  Whilo  the  Trojans  are  partaking  of  food  on  the  Bhorc,  and  nsing  their 
loavea  of  bread  for  diahes  on  which  to  lay  the  gathered  fruits,  the  bread  itself  bemg 
finally  eatcn,  Asc.inius  esclaims,  '•  We  are  eating  our  tables  l"-and  thus  the  predio 
lion  of  the  Harpy  and  of  Anchises  is  fulfllled. 

109,  Adorea  liba;  wheaten  loaves. 110.  Epulis;  their  food;  i.  e.  the 

fruits  they  havc  gathered  in  the  neighborhood. 111.  Cerealc  solum  ;  the 

Cereal  support ;  thc  wheaten  table. 114,  115.  Orbem  and  qnadris,  both 

describe  the  loaf,  which  was  circular  and  divided  into  four  equal  parts  or 
quadrants,  by  radiating  marks.     For  the  infinitive,  see  on  vi.  696. 117. 


542  ■KOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

Allndcns;  ^cs^m^r. 119.  Eripnlt— prcssit ;  Ihe  fathcr  caught  the  vord  in 

stantbjfrom  the  lips  o/(thc  boy)  speaking,  a,id,  amazed  by  the  divine  revela 

tion,  folhwcd  up  (tbe  omen.)     For  he  forthwith  exclaimed,  all  hail,  &c. 

123.  Antliises.     Comp.  iii.  257,  and  note. 128.  Haec,  illa;  see  on  iii. 

558  ;  a  similar  relation  of  the  proaouns. 136.  Prlmani ;  first  of  thc  dei- 

ties  to  be  worshipped  on  taking  possession  of  a  ne^^Iand. 139.  Phrygiani 

niatrem;  Cybele.   See  iii.  lli. uo.  Dnpliees  parcntes  ;  his  tv^o  parents ; 

Anchises  in  Hades,  and  Venus  in  Olympus. 

148-194.  On  the  follo<tving  day,  the  Trojans  explore  the  neighborhood  of  their  camp 
around  tho  Tiber  and  the  Numicius,  and  Acneas  sends  a  hundred  envoys  to  confer 
with  kuig  Latinus,  ^vhile  he  commences  the  building  of  his  new  camp  or  town. 

150.  Divcrsi ;   in  different  directioiis. Hacc  stagna ;  supply  esse  de- 

pcnding  on  explorant,  or  a  verb  implied  in  it ;  thcy  ascertain  that  thcse  are 
the  still  waters  of  the  fountain  Numicius.  The  Numicius,  or  Numicus,  a  lit- 
tle  stream  on  tho  coast  of  Latium,  issucs  from  a  swamp ;  it  is  now  called 

Slagno  di  Levantc. 151.  Ramis  Palladis ;  loith  the  boughs  sacrcd  to  Pal- 

las;  the  olive,  emblem  of  peace. Yelatos;  veiled;  it  is  not  used  here  of 

wreaths  bound  round  the  head,  but  borne  in  the  hand,  and  called  below, 
237,  vittas,  because  they  are  formcd  by  means  of  laurel  leaves  and  bands! 

Comp.  237,  viii.  116,  xi.  101. 157.  Dcsignat.     Comp.  v.  755.     The  little 

■town  thus  enclosed  was  Troja  Nova,  or  Castrum  Trojae,  four  furlongs  frora 
the  sca.     Its  walls  extended  on  the  right  hand  to  the  river ;  on  the  left 

towards  the  sea,  there  was  a  plain. 158.  Molitar  locnm ;  bxdlds  up  the 

place;  for  "he  builds  houses  in  the  place."     Comp.  290. 159.  Pinnis  • 

for  muris. 160.  Latinornm  loses  the  last  two  letters  here.   See  Gr.  §  307* 

'^- ^^'^-  Ingentcs;  of  noble  aspect ;  the  men  are  of  heroic  stature. \ 

1G8.  Tecta ;  here,  a  temple,  according  to  the  Roman  custom  of  receiving 

envoys  in  temples. 169.  Mcdins ;  in  the  midst  of  his  attendants ;  thil 

seems  the  most  natural  rendering,  though  Forbiger  translates  in  mcdio  solio. 

171.  llrbesnmma;  on  the  acropolis. 174.  Omen;  the  sacrcd  usage ; 

a  practice  ominous  of  good  to  the  reign  of  the  new  king. 175.  irietc  ; 

here  ar-ye-te. 176.  Pcrpctois  mensis  ;  at  the 

continuous  tablcs ;  the  tables  arranged  in  ono 

unbrokcn  line. 177-180.     We  can  havc  no 

bcttcr  authority  than  Virgil  on  the  namc,  char- 
acter,  and  origin,  of  thc  gcnuine  Italian  gods 

and  heroes. Cedro  retains  the  final  o. 

186.  — qnc  in  spindaquc  is  lengthcned  by  thc 

arsis. 187-189.   Ipse  Picns— sedebat,  gcre- 

bat.     Tiie  imagc  of  Picns,  to  whom  tlie  temple 

13  dcdieatcd,  unlike  the  othcr  i?fatues,  is  in  n 

''""*■  sitting  posturc,  in  a  conspicuous  place,  perhaps 

at  one  cnd  of  thc  court,  holding  thc  lituus  or  augur's  staff,  and  clothod  in  a 

'rahea,  or  stnped  toga.     The  lituus  is  cailed  Qmrinalia,  as  being  one  of  tho 


BOOK   SEVENTH,  543 

gymbols  assigned  by  tlie  Romans  to  Quirinus,  the  deified  Romulus.  For  tlie 
government  of  the  ablative,  lituo,  supply  some  such  word'  as  instructus, 

easily  suggested  by  the  following  succinctus. 190.   Aarca ;   here  pro- 

nounced  au-rya. 191.  Ayem.     Circe,  the  lover  (conjux)  of  Picus,  trans- 

formed  him  into  a  woodpecker. 

195-285.  Latinus  gives  the  envoys  a  kind  reception,  and  Hinonetis,  on  their  part, 
makes  known  the  condition  and  wants  of  the  Trojans,  and  presents  the  gifts  sent  by 
Aeneas.  Latinns  promlses  them  a  peaceful  home  in  Latium,  and  in  obedience  to  the 
oracle  offers  his  daughter  in  m.arriage  to  Aeneas.  The  envoys  are  'diemissed  with 
presents  for  themselves  and  Aeueas,  and  return  to  the  camp. 

196.  Anditlqne — cnrsum ;  and  not  unheard  of  do  you  turn  your  course 

hither  on  the  sea. 197.  Egcntcs ;    supply  ipsos ;    or  yourselves  needing 

u-hat. 203.   Satnrni  gcntcm.      In  the  time  of  Saturn,  the  golden  age, 

men  acted  uprightly,  not  by  compulsion,  but  from  goodness  of  heart,  sua 

.•^joo7de,  and  by  habit  inheYited  frora  that  ancient  deity." 200.  Anrnnc08 

sencs  ;  the  Auruncian  fathers.     The  Aurunci  were  an  ancient  tribe  of  Ital- 

ians,  situa*ed  between  Latium  and  Campania. Ut ;  interrogative ;  how. 

207.  Dardanns.     For  the  tradition,  see  iii.  107  sqq.,  and  note. 208. 

Thmciam  Samon  ;  the  island  of  Samotfirace,  now  Samothraki,  in  the  upper 

part  of  the  Aegean. 209.  Binc — ab  sedc ;  hence  (namely)  from  the  Tus- 

can  seat.     Comp.  huc,  ii.  18. Corythi.     The  Etruscan  Cortona. 211. 

Addit;  by  receiving  Dardanus  as  a  god  to  be  worshipped,  the  golden  palace 

of  Olympus  adds  one  {numerum)  to  the  altars  of  the  gods. 21.5.  Rcgione 

Tiae ;  in  respect  to  the  direction  of  our  voyage. 219.  Ab  JOYC.      Comp. 

n.  pn   i.  28. 225.  Et  siqnem,  ete. ;  both  if  the  remotest  land  confnes  any 

one  in  the  surrounding  oeean,  and  if  the  belt  of  the  torrid  zone  stretched  6e- 
tween  (in  the  midst  of )  four  zones  separates  any  one  (from  one  part  of  the 
world),  he  (such  an  one)  has  heard  hoxo  great,  &c.  Mefuso,  flowing  round 
aud  round  into  itself,  either  enclosing  islands,  or  the  whole  continent.  For- 
biger  makes  oceano  the  ablat.  of  situation.     Its  last  vowel  is  retained  here 

in  scanning  the  verse. 232.  — qne  continues  the  negation;  and  gratitude 

for  so  great  a  favor  shall  not  perish. 237.  Prccantia ;  pronounced  here 

pre-can-tya. 241.  Ecpctit;    hither  he  returns  (rctraces  his  way);  i.  e. 

Dardanus  comes  back  hither  in  the  blood  of  hig  children,  the  Trojans.  This 
is  the  interpretation  with  our  punctuation.  "Witli  Heyne's,  which  connects 
repetit  and  urget  by  a  comma  instead  of  the  semicolon,  Apollo  is  the  subject 

of  both  verbs.- 243.  Dat ;  Aeneas  is  the  subject. 246.  Gestamcn  ;  the 

array ;  explained  by  sceptmm,  &c. 254.   Sortem  ;   the  oracle. 255. 

Bnnc,  illnm;  see  on  these  pronouns,  above,  128.     Ileditatur,  or  some  simi- 

lar  verb  suggested  by  volvit,  is  imderstood  before  the  infinitives. 258. 

Qnae  OCCnpct ;  which  is  dcstined  to  possess  ;  such  that  it  is  destined  to  pos- 

sess. 261.  RegeLatino;  aslong  as  Latinus  shall  be  king. 266.  Ty- 

ranni ;  prince.  There  is  here,  as  welF  as  below,  in  342,  448,  no  disparage- 
nent  in  the  term. 271.  H«c  Latio  rcstare  cannnt ;  they  predict  ihat  thi» 


544  NOTES   ON    THE    AENEID. 

dcstiny  awaits  Latium. 274.  Nnmcro  omni ;  for  the  whole  mnnher ;  i.  c. 

of  the  cnvoys. 27T.  Ostro.     The  coveriiigs  of  the  horses  are  of  purple 

cloth  embroidered  with  gold. 282-284.  Patri— fnrata  creavit ;  the  cun- 

ning  {daedala)  Circe  had  bred  these  bastard  horses  by  secretly  putting  a 
common  mare  to  one  of  the  horses  of  her  fatlier,  the  Sun-god.  Thus  she 
stole  them  from  her  father. 

286-340.  Juno,  enraged  that  she  cannot  iiltimately  prevcnt  the  succees  of  the  Tro- 
jans,  determines  at  least  for  the  prcsent  to  visit  them  with  her  wrath.  She  summon» 
the  fury,  Allecto,  from  the  lower  world,  to  forward  her  plan  of  kindliug  strife  betweea 
the  Trojans  and  Latins. 

286.  Inachiis  ;  Argos  is  termed  Inachian  from  Inachus,  its  ancient  king 

and  founder. 294,295.  Num — potnere  ;  couldthey?  was  it  possible  that 

they  should  fall,  &c.  ?     No !  they  found  a  way  through  the  midst  of  battal- 

ions  and  flames. 297.  Credo  ;  /  supposc,  forsooth ;  in  bitter  irony. 

300.  Ansa  (sm?w)  ;  /  have  darcd;  i.  e.  even  against  the  known  decrees  of 

fate. 304,  305.  Mars — yalnit.     Pirithoiis,  king  of  the  Lapithae,  invited 

all  the  gods  to  his  wedding  feast,  excepting  only  Mars.     On  account  of  this 

slight  Mars  stirred  up  the  Centaurs  to  make  war  oii  the  Lapithae. Lapi- 

tlinm ;  for  Lapitharum. 305, 306.  Concessit  Calydona  Dianae.  Calydon,  aa 

ancient  state  of  Aetoha,  had  neglected  tbe  worship  of  Diana,  who  therefore 
punished  its  king,  Oeneus,  and  his  people,  by  sending  a  fierce  wild  boar  to 

ravage  their  land. 306.     The  accusatives  Lapithas  and  Calydona  are  in 

apposition  with  tlie  same  words  in  the  foregoing  clause. 310.  Qaod  sl; 

hut  if. 317.  At  this  sacrifice  of  their  people  let  the  son-in-law  and  father- 

in-law  consummate  their  alliance. 320.  Cisscis  ;  the  daAtghter  of  Cisseus  ; 

Hecuba.  The  allusion  is  to  the  dreara  of  Hecuba  before  the  birth  of  Paris. 
As  she  dreamed  that  her  offspring  would  be  a  fire-brand,  and  thc  cause  of 
the  destruction  of  Troy,  so  has  Venus  brought  forth  in  Aeneas  a  like  olf- 
spring,  idem,  one  attended  with  the  same  destiny,  who  shall  in  like  manner, 
by  marrying  a  foreign  princcss,  occasion  disaster  to  the  new  or  restored 

Troy,  {Pergama  recidiva,)  and  thus  he  shall  be  a  second  Paris  to  it. 324. 

Allecto ;  Greek  form  of  tlie  accusative.     Sce  Gr.  §  S6. 326.  Cordi ;  are 

apleasure.     See  Gr.  §  227. 329.  Atra;  dark  anA  hlach  are  common  ap- 

pellations  of  all  objects  counectcd  with  the  lower  world  ;  including  both  the 
ghosts,  the  gods,  and  monsters ;  and  cven  Proserpine.     The  Komans  con- 

ceived  the  hair  of  the  furies  to  be  composcd  whoUy  of  scrpents. 332. 

Infracta;  hroken;  {vom.  infnngo  ;  as  in  v.  T84. 336.  Vcrsare  ;  to  involvs 

in,  distract  with. 339.  Crimina  belii ;  crimina,  ex  qitibus  bclla  oriantur ; 

mutual  wrongs  and  accusations  which  may  lead  to  war. 

341-405.  Tho  fury  Allccto  takoa  poseession  of  tho  mind  of  Amata,  and  Btimulstcs 
her  to  rosjst  the  marriage  of  Aencas  and  Lavinia.  Unablo  to  dissuado  Latinus  fiom 
hls  purpoBe,  Amata  couvcys  Laviiiia  to  thc  woods,  undcr  thc  pretcxt  of  cclcbrating 
Ihe  riles  of  Bacchus. 

844,  845»  Qaam — (oqnebant ;  whom  ivoman''^  rjrief  and  spitc  were  fretting 


BOOK   SEVENTH,  545 

348.  Qno  menstro ',  for  ut  eo  monstro;  that  by  this  monster. 350: 

Fallit  f arentem ;  beguiles  her  in  her  frenzy ;  as  in  her  excitement  she  does 

not  pcrceive  the  serpent. 351.  Lnes  5  the  pest.     Before  she  feels  the  full 

power  of  tlie  serpent's  spirit  (vipeream  animam)  she  has  recourse  to  gentle 

entreaties. 360.   0  genitor ;  0  (thou  her)  father. 365.   Qoid ;   for 

qiialis ;  ichat  is  thy  honor?  whither  lias  thy  good  faith  departed? 367. 

Latinis  ;  for  the  Latins. 370.  Beor.     Amata  judges  that  Ardea,  the  city 

of  Turnus  and  the  EutuH,  being  separate  from  idissidet  taken  literally)  and 
independent  {lihera)  of  the  kingdom  of  Latinus,  Turnus  is  a  foreigner,  exter- 

nus,  and  that  the  gods  so  pronounce,  dicere. 372.  Inachns  Acrisinsqne. 

According  to  the  tradition  -which  Virgil  follows,  Danae,  the  daughter  of 
Acrisius,  and  granddaughter  of  Inachus,  landed  in  Italy,  and  married  the 
prince  of  the  Rutuh,  Pilumnus.     Thus  her  descendant.  Turnus,  is  of  Argive 

extraction. 377.  Immensam ;   in  its  whole  extent.     She  roamed  wildly 

(lymphata)  throughout  the  city,  in  every  street  and  byway,  unrestrained  by 
any  sense  of  decorum,  and  therefore  not  keeping  within  the  limited  circle 

of  her  palace  and  royal  walks. 383.  Dant  animos  ;  f/ive  vclocity ;  i.  e.  to 

the  top. 385.  Nnmine  ;  the  divine  command. 389,  390.  Evoe  ;  dissyl- 

lable ;  e-vwe,  or  eu-we. Solnm — YOCiferans ;    exclaiming  that  thou  (Bac- 

chus)  alone  art  worthy  of  the  virgin. Molles;  the  thyrsi  are  wreathed 

with  vine  leaves ;  heaoe  soft  or  pliant,  with  reference  only  to  the  leaves. 

— Snmere;  the  subject  is  eam,  referring  to  Laviniam. 391.  Lnstrare; 

moves  around  thee  ;  that  is,  in  the  dances  around  thy  altar. Pascere  cri- 

nem;  unbinds  her  hair  for  thee ;  literally, /eecJs  the  hair ;  referring  to  the 
custom  in  the  worship  of  Bacchus,  of  leaving  the  hair  to  hang  loose. 
405.  Stimnlis — Bacchi;  everywhere  urges  with  the  incitements  of  Bacchus ; 
i.  e.  with  a  power  equal  to  the  real  influence  of  Bacchus. 

406-474.  Allecto  now  proceeds  to  Ardea,  the  city  of  Turnus,  and  appears  to  him  in 
Lis  Bleep  under  the  form  of  an  aged  priestess.  Failing  at  first  to  rouse  his  spirit 
against  Aeneas,  she  assumes  hor  real  form.  Tiirnus  awakes  full  of  fury,  and  summons 
his  followers  to  war  against  the  Trojans. 

412.  Aris;  dat.  for  ab  avis. 413.  Fnit;  has  been ;  has  ceased  to  be. 

Comp.  ii.  325. 421-425.  Labores,  periclis.     The  whole  passage  impUes 

that  Turnus  has  been  the  principal  defender  of  Latium  against  its  enemies, 

cspecially  against  the  Tyrrhenians. 427.  Adeo ;  cven.     So  important  is 

the  occasion  that  Juno  herself  has  directed  me  to  say  this. 428.  Satnrnia» 

See  on  i.  23. 430.  Inarma;  join  with  laetus;  ready  for  arms ;  with  a 

mind  joyful  in  the  expectation  of  battle.     This  is  Wagner'3  interpretation. 

432.  Magna  ;  according  to  some,  the  accusative  after  jubet ;  the  power 

of  the  gods  demands  great  achievemcnts  (of  thee.)    Some  join  magna  with  vis. 

433.  Dicto  parere  fatctnr ;   consents  to  fulfil  (obey)  his  p-omi^.    See 

above,  36G. 444.  Qnis;  {or  guibus,  dat.  after  gcrcnda. 446.  Oranti  $ 

vchile  still  speaking.  Orare  is  used  also  in  its  etymological  sense  in  x.  96. 
•- — 44Tt  Tot  hydrls.    Comp.  329. 450.  Geminos.    Two  serpents  were 


546  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

niade  conspicuous  on  tlie  lieads  of  furies  and  of  the  Gorgons.     Sec  wood- 

cut,  p.  568. 459t  Corporc ;  for  ex  corporc— — 460.  Toro ;  ke  seeks  the 

arms  on  his  couch.     Heroes  liept  weapons  by  them,  even  when  iu  bed.     See 

vi.  524. 462.  Ir.l  snper  ;  and  anr)er  still  more  ;  anger  on  account  of  thc 

preference  of  Aeneas  as  suitor  for  Lavinia. 464,  465.  Aqn.ai  amnis ;  ihe 

torrent  of  water  ;  for  the  old  genitive,  sce  on  iii.  354. 467.  Pollata  pace  ; 

since  the  peacc  has  been  violated;  i.  e.  by  Latinus  in  promising  Lavinia  to . 

Acneas. 4T0.  (He  declares)  that  he  comes  (to  the  contest)  a  match  [satis') 

for  Trojans  and  Latins  hoth. 4T3.  Hnne — jnTentae ;  the  wonderful  grace 

of  his  beauti/  and  youth  moves  one ;  admiration,  that  is,  of  Turnus,  who  is 
young  and  beautiful.  Others  are  stimulated  by  the  reuown  of  his  regal  an- 
cestors,  {atavi  rcges,)  and  others  by  the  memory  of  his  former  deeds  iu  war. 

475-571.  Allecto  turns  now  to  the  Trojaiis,  and  findhig  Ascaniua  engaged  in  the 
cliase,  ehe  causes  his  hounds  to  attack  a  stag  ■whicli  is  the  favorite  of  the  family  of  Tyr- 
rheus,  the  herdsman  of  king  Latinus.  The  wounded  stag  flees  to  the  house  of  Tyr- 
rheuB  for  shelter.  The  herdsman  calla  to  arms,  Ascanius  is  succored  by  his  country- 
men,  and  the  first  blood  is  shed.  Allecto  is  then  dismissed  by  Juno  to  the  infernal 
regious,  by  the  way  of  Lake  Amsanctus. 

411.  Arte  nOTa  ;  with  neio  dcvice  ;  with  the  intention  of  devising  a  strata- 

gem  of  mischief  additional  to  those  already  executed. 483.  Cornibns  in- 

gens ;  lofty  with  his  horns ;  for  the  prose  iorm,  cornibus  ingentihus. 

490.  Mannni ;  genitive  after  patiens.     But  Forbiger  prefers  to  make  it  in 

the  accusative  after  joa<ie?!s  as  a  participle. 492.  Ipse  ;  himself ;  sponta- 

neously. Qn.aniTis  ;  in  the  night  however  late. 494,  495.  FlnTio  sccun* 

do  deflneret ;  was  floating  on  the  downward  curreiit. Bipa ;  on  the  hank; 

at  times  reposing  himself  on  the  shore. 497.  Erranti  dens  ;  unaided  hia 

hand  might  have  erred ;  but  a  superior  power  (perhaps  Allecto  is  meant) 

directed   the   arrow. 504.    Conclamat ;    clamore  vocat. 505.    Pcstls  ; 

the  scourge  ;  Allecto.     She  has  already  made  the  rustics  aware  of  the  out- 

rage. 513.  Canit ;  soimds. 514.  Intendit  TOCCm  ;  swells  the  hlast. 

516,  517.  Andiit;  the  lake  of  Diana  ou  the  Alban  mount,  far  to  the  south- 
cast  of  the  Tibcr,  and  the  Nar  and  Vclinus  far  to  the  north-east,  that  is,  the 
whole  country  far  around  heard  the  sound.  The  lake  of  Diana  is  now  called 
Lake  Nemi,  near  Aricia,  now  Ariccia,  fiftecn  miles  south  of  Kome.  The 
river  Nar  runs  betwcen  Umbria  and  the  Sabine  country,  and  falls  into  the 
Tiber.  The  lake  Velinus  was  produccd  by  the  overflow  of  the  river  Velinus, 
and  was  led  into  the  Nar  by  an  artificial  channel  cut  through  a  ledge  of  rocic 
by  the  consul  M.  Curius  Dcntatus,  B.  C.  270.     Tliis  produced  the  celcbrated 

fall  of  Terni. 524.  Non  ccrtamiue  a^ircsti  agitnr ;  thc  contest  is  not  car- 

ried  on  in  the  rustic  manner. 528.  Primo  ponto  ;  this  is  a  more  authentic 

reading  than  primo  vento ;  and  the  scnse  is  the  same  as  if  it  were  primum 

ponto  ;  first  hcgins  to  foam  on  the  sea. 532.  Fncrat ;  hadhccn  thc  oldcst ; 

until  now,  when  his  life  Jnds ;  when  he  is  struck  by  the  fiital  arrow. 

633.  Vnlnns;  as  in  ii.  529,  for  the  weapon  itself. tdjie  Tocis;   of  the 


BOOK   SEVENTH. 


547 


moist  (passage  of)  the  voice. 541.  Promissi  potens;  having  fulfilhd  her 

promise  ;  literally,  mistress  of  her  promise. 557,  558.    27ta<  (supreme) 

father  ivould  not  be  willing  that  thou  shouldst  wander  too  freely  in  this  upj)er 

air. Amsancti.     Amsanctus  was  a  lake  iii  the  country  of  the  Hirpini,  a 

Samnite  tribe  in  the  Apennines.  As  it  emitted  noxious  vapors,  it  was  sup- 
posed  to  be  one  of  the  eutrance^  to  Ilades.     It  is  now  caWed  Lago  (T  An- 

sante,  ov  Mufiti. 569.  Bnpto  ingens  Acberonte ;  vast  hy  reason  of  the 

bursiing  of  Acheron.     Gr.  §  274,  K.  5 ;  Z.  §  637. 5T1.  LCTabat;  a  cua- 

tomary  action.  Allecto  was  wont  to  relieve  the  world  of  her  presence  by 
descending  through  this  opening. 

572-640.  The  etrife  ia  continued  by  Juno.  The  shepherds  hasten  to  Laurentum, 
ond  Turnus  with  them  urges  Latinus  to  war.  The  king,  resisting  in  vain,  leaves  the 
control  of  things  to  other  hands.  On  the  refusal  of  Latinus,  Juno  herself  opens  the 
temple  of  Janus,  as  the  signal  of  war.  The  Italians  now  make  preparations  for  war, 
and  their  principal  cities  are  described. 

5T2,  573.  Extremam  mannm ;  the  finishing  hand. ^Ex  aeie ;  from  the 

hattle  ground. 577.  Igni ;  ficry  passion  ;  as  in  ii.  57o. 580.  Attonitae 

BaccIiO ;  maddened  hy  Bacchus. 581.    Insnltant ;    rush  through;  here  a 

transitive  verb.     The  husbands  and  sons  of  the  Bacchanals,  influenced  by 

the  name  of  Amata,  importune  for  {fatigant)  war.^ 591.  Datnr;  when  no 

power  is  given  (to  the  king)  to  overcome  their  mad  purpose. 593.  Mnlta ; 

adverbially  for  multum. Auras  inanes ;  the  empty  air ;  the  air  that  can- 

not  answer  his  prayers. 595.  Has  poenas ;  punishment  for  these  things. 

597.  Seris ;  too  late. 598.  Omnis — 

portns ;  the  port  in  which  I  am  seeking  my 
refuge  is  so  near,  that  it  is  all  {omnis)  open 
before  me,  in  limine ;  the  passage  may  be 
translated,  my  haven  of  rest  is  all  in  view. 

601.  Protenns;  perpetually;   coutinu- 

ously  from  that  time. 601,  602.   Urbes 

Albanae ;  Alba  bad  thirty  colonies,  which 
are  here  meant,  as  well  as  Alba  itself.  Alba 
was  in  fact  the  mother  city  of  Latium.     See 

Mommsen,  ch.  3,  p.  26. 604.  Getls ;  the 

Getae,  a  Thracian  people  dwelling  on  the 
Danube,  who  with  the  Dacians  and  other 

neighboring  tribes  were  hostile  to  the  Romans. 605.     The  Hyrcanians,  a 

Caspian  tribe.  See  on  iv.  367.  Augustus  sent  an  army  against  the  Arabs 
in  B.  C.  24.  The  Indi  sent  envoys  to  Augustus  to  sue  for  peace,  at  the 
time  of  his  threatened  invasion  of  the  Parthians.  The  latter  people,  or 
rather  their  king  Phraates,  daunted  by  the  preparations  of  Augustus,  B.  C. 
23,  voluntarily  sent  back  the  standards  which  they  had  captured  from  Cras- 
gus.  This  event  is  often  mentioned  by  the  poets  as  one  of  the  most  brilliant 
saccesscs  of  Augustus. 607.  Belli  portae.    See  oni.  294. -609.  Aerei; 


548  NOTES   ON   THE   AENEID. 

here  a  dissyllable,  ae-rei. 612.  Cinetn  Gabino ;  wilh  the  Gahinian  cinc- 

htre ;  a  peculiar  mode  of  adjusting  the  toga.     See  Dict.  of  Antiq. 613» 

Stridcntia  liniiua ;  in  apposition  with  has  {portas.) 624.  Ardnns  agrees 

with  the  gender  of  the  individuals  included  in  pars,  but  the  siugular  for  the 

plural  is  anomalous.     Scc  Gr.  §  205,  R.  3,  (2). 629.  Adco ;  even;  in  ad- 

dition  to  what  istilready  declared,  what  is  still  more,  five  citics  armed. 

Atina  ;  a  Volscian  town  on  thc  border  of  Latium. Tibnr ;  now  Tivoli ; 

situated  on  a  lofty  eminence  at  the  eastern  side  of  the  Campagna.     One  of 

the  most  flourishing  cities  of  that  region,  and  hence  superhum. 631« 

Crustnmeri ;  the  more  commoa  names  of  this  town  were  Crustumerium, 
Crustumeria,  and  Crustuminum.     It  no  longer  existed  in  the  time  of  Virgil. 

Antemnae  ;  a  city  once  situated  at  the  confluence  of  thc  Anio  and 

Tiber;  it  had  also  perished  long  before  the  time  of  Virgil.     The  verse  is 

spondaic,  and  the  final  syllable  of  turrigerae  is  retained. 634.    Spondaic. 

635.  Hnc;  to  this  employment. 639.  Trilicem.     See  on  iil.  46*7. 

641-817.  After  another  invocation  to  the  muses,  the  poet  enumerates  the  Italian 
forces  which  assembled  to  the  war,  describing  their  chiefs,  and  the  several  localitiea 
aud  towns  from  which  they  were  gathered. 

641.  Helicona;  Helicon;  a  mountain  m  Boeotia,  one  of  the  favorite 

haunts  of  the  muses. 652.  Agyllina ;  from  Agylla,  the  aneient  uame  of 

Caere,  a  town  of  Etruria,  near  the  modcrn  Cervetri,  {Cacre  vctus.) Ne- 

qnidqnam ;  both  father  and  son  perished  in  the  war.     See  x.  820  sqq. 

657.  Clipco ;  and  07i  his  shield  he  hears  his  father^s  symhol,  the  hundred 

S7iakes,  &c. 660.    Fnrtivnm ;    adverbially,  instead  of  furtivo  agrecing 

with  partu. 662.  Gcryone ;  a  giant  monster  of  Gades  {Cadiz)'m  Spain, 

the  kecpcr  of  beautiful  cattle.     He  was  slain  by  nercules,  who  conveyed 

his  cattle  across  the  Alps  to  the  valley  of  the  Tiber. 664.  Gernnt ;  the 

foUowcrs  of  Aventinus  are  meant. 665.  Veru ;  a  dart  in  the  form  of  a 

spit.     See  Dict.  of  Antiq. 666.  Torqnens ;  throwi^ig  around  himself,  or 

arouTid  his  body.     Comp.  viii.  460. 668.  Indntns  capiti ;  supply  the  acc. 

illud;  having  put  this  07i  his  hcad. 6T2.  Gcntcm  ;  for  urheni,  in  appositioD 

with   moc^iia. 671.    Tibur  was  said  to  have   becu   foundcd  by  threo 

brothcrs  from   Argos,    desccndants  of  thc  soothsayer  Amphiaraus.     Thc 
town  was   said   to   have   bcen    named   aftcr   Tiburtus,   the    cklest  of  the 

brothers. 675.     Homolc  and  Othrys  wcrc  towns  in  Thcssaly,  inhnbited 

by  thc  Ccntaurs. 678-690.  Caccnins.     Cato  in  the  Origines  says  that 

some  virgins,  going  for  water,  found  Cacculus  in  the  fire,  and  therefore 
callcd  him  the  son  of  Vulean ;  and  also  Cacculus,  on  account  of  his  small 

eyes. 682.     Praenestc,  now  Palestrina,  situated  on  a  lofty  hill  at  the 

entrance  of  the  Campagna  on  the  south-wcst.     Thc  wood-cut  gives  a  vicw 

of  it  takcn  from  the  opposite  town  of  Colonna,  thc  ancicnt  Labicum. 

681.  Late  ;  from  far  around. 682.  Qniqnc ;  hoth  the  men  who,  &c.     AU 

thc  other  placcs  hcre  mentioned  are  in  thc  vicinity  of  Praeneste.         685» 
iJUd^tiic.  The  head-watcrs  of  the  Amasenus  wcrc  in  tbe  Volscian  highlanda, 


BOOK   SEVENTH. 


549 


Praenesle  (Palestrina.) 

not  far  from  Praeneste. 691.  Messapns,  a  Tyrrhcnian  chief.     His  follow- 

ers  are  from  Fescennium  and  otbcr  places  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Tiber. 

695,  696.  Hi — lii ;  two  diflerent  divisions  of  his  troops, Faiiscos  ; 

the  people  of  the  town  of  Falerii. 696.  Habent  seems  to  be  employed 

hore  in  two  significations ;  these  Jiave  (these  troops  contain)  Fescennine  bat- 


Soract«  (8.  Silvestro.) 


550  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

ialions,  &c. ;    these  inhalit  the  heiffhtx,  kc. 698t   Acqaatl  nninero }  in 

equal  ranls ;  arrangcd  so  as  to  be  equal  in  number,  rank  after  rank,  in  the 
column  of  march.  Othcrs  undcrstand,  moving  with  regular  stcp  to  musical 
numbers;  equally  guided  by  "the  time"  or  rhythm;  and  tUis  certainly  is 

in  keeping  with  thc  coutext. 701.  Amnls ;  the  river  Cayster  is  meant. 

703.  Ncc  qnisqnam,  etc. ;  nor  icould  any  one  snppose  that  brazen  armed 

battalions  were  being  gathered  in  {ex)  such  an  immense  host,  &c.     It  seems 

more  like  a  countless  multitude  of  sca  birds. 707.  Clansns.    Tbe  poe* 

fancies  the  Claudian  family,  gens  Claudia,  so  celebratcd  in  Koman  history, 

to  bc  descended  from  the  hero  Clausus. 710.  Prisci  Qnirites ;  the  early 

inhabitants  of  Cures,  an  ancient  Sabine  town,  which  gave  its  name  in  the 

historic  pcriod  to  the  Quirites,  or  Roman  citizens. 716.  Hortinae  classcs  ; 

the  soldicry  of  Ilorta.     Only  persons  of  the  military  agc  were  enrollcd  in  the 

classes  at  Rome.     Ilcnce  classes  here  is  equivalent  to  militcs. 717.     The 

Allia  is  an  ill-starred  name  on  account  of  the  great  defeat  sustained  by  the 

Romans  there  iu  the  battle  with  Breonus,  B.  C.  390. 720.  Vcl ;  or  as 

mayiy  as. Solc  novo ;  iti  the  beginning  of  summer. 721.  Bermi ;  the 

Ilermus,  a  river  in  Lydia. 721.  Ilalaesns ;  formerly  under  Agamemnon 

at  Troy;  hence  Agamemnonius. 725.  Fclicia  Baccho ;  fruitful  in  the 

vine. 726.  Massica  ;  the  jlassic  fields,  on  thc  southern  border  of  Latium. 

The  other  places  mcntioned  in  this  passage  are  in  the  same  region,  the  coun- 

try  of  the  Auruuci  and  Oscans. 728.  Aeqnora ;  plains.' 730.  Aclydes. 

Thc  Aclys  was  a  javehn  which  was  hurled  and  then  pulled  back  again  by 

means  of  a  thong  attached  to  the  shaft. 732.  CoiaminxiS',  for  the  close 

encounter. 73i.  Ocbale ;  Oebalus  was  the  son  of  Telon  by  the  nymph 

Sebethis,  daughter  of  the  river  god  Sebethus  in  Campania.  Telon  had  emi- 
grated  with  his  Teleboae  from  the  island  of  Taphos  near  Acarnania  to  the 
island  of  Caprcae  opposite  Naples.     Oebalus,  dissatisfied  with  his  small  do- 

minion,  secured  additional  possessions  on  the  main-Iand  in  Campania. 

738.  Sarnns ;  a  river  flowing  by  Pompeii  into  the  bay  of  Naples. 741. 

Cateias ;  missile  weapons  afterwards  used  by  the  Teutons. 742.    Hie  cov- 

crings  of  whose  hcads  were  (raade  of )  the  bark,  &c. Qnis  ;  dat.  after  erant. 

744.  Nersac ;  the  chief  city  of  the  Aequi  or  gens  Acquicula  of  Latium. 

746.  Cni  gens,  etc. ;  whose  nation  is  the  Acquiculan,  most  savage,  &c. 

747.  Dnris  glcbis ;  the  soil  being  ruggcd. 750.     The  Marsi  are  the 

followers  of  Umbro.     They  were  a  warlike  pcople  of  the  Apenniues,  called 

hcre  Jlarruvia  gcns  from  thcir  chicf  city,  Marruvium. 752.  Slissn;  by 

thc  command. 781.  Ibat  bello  ;  wcnt  to  thc  war  ;  bcllo  for  in  bellum.    Tho 

etory  of  Virbius  and  Ilippolytus  is  partly  of  Greek  and  partly  of  Italian 

origiu.     See  Classical  Dict. 762.  Mator  Aricia;  his  native  Aricia;  not 

his  mother,   literally. 763.  Egeriac  ;   cithcr  there  were  two  groves  of 

Egeria,  or  the  one  so  ealled  near  Aricia  is  the  true  onc. 764.  Litora ; 

the  shores  of  the  Arician  lake. Placabilis;  bccause  fhe  aUar  of  Diana 

here   did   not,   as   in  Tauris,   require   hnman   victims. 165.  Novcrcae ; 


BOOK   SEVENTH.  551 

Phaedra.     See  the  story  of  Hippolytus  in  the  Classical  Dict. TCQ.  Paeo- 

niishcrbis;  with  the  drugs  of  Apollo ;  pronounce  Pai-o-n^e.?. TT2.  Rc« 

pertorem ;  Aesculapius,  son  of  Phoebus. 7TT.  Virbius ;   this  name  was 

borne  both  by  the  restored  Hippolytus,  and  by  his  son,  the  leader  here  dc- 

scribcd  as  coming  to  the  war. 784.  YCTtitnr ;   moves  around. 786. 

Aclnaeos  ignes ;  flames  as  ficrce  as  those  of  Aetna. 787.  Tam  magis,  etc. ; 

so  much  the  more  it  (was)  raging,  &c.     Illa  refers  to  Chimaera.     With  fre- 

■iiem  and  eff^era  supply  erat. 790.  Anro;  for  ex  auro.     For  the  fable  of 

lo  see  Classical  Dict.     This  device  was  appropriate  to  Turnus,  as  the  de- 

scendant  of  Inachus. 796.  Picti  SCnta  ;  painted  as  to  their  shields ;  for 

liictis  scutis.     The  Labici  were  from  Labicum,  now  Colonna,  south  of  Rome. 

802.    Ufens ;    a    rivcr  which  flows  through  the  Pontine  marshes  and 

cnters  the  sea  near  the  ancient  Auxur,  or  Terracina. 803.  Camilla ;  this 

lieroine,  leader  of  the  Yolsci,  is  more  particularly  described  in  xi.  632-59G. 

806.  Mauns ;  the  Greek  accusative. — ■. — 807.  Pati  and  praeTcrterc  depend 

on  assueta,  though  in  the  foregoing  clause  it  is  followed  by  the  datives  colo 

and  colathis. 808.  Intactae  segetis ;  she  would  fly  over  the  summit  of 

the  blades  of  standing  corn  not  seeming  to  touch  them. 809.  Laeslsset ; 

for  laesura  esset. 814.  Ut ;  interrogative. 817.   Myrtnm ;   shepherds 

made  the  shafts  of  spears  of  myrtle  wood. 


Teo.  ;   ■,  Teano, 'n  the  couiitry  of  the  Sidioiul. 


552 


NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 


Satuniu8. 


BOOK   A''!!!. 

Alliimce  of  Aeneas  and  Evander, 
neas,  madc  by  Viilcan. 


The  shield  of  Ae 


1-101.  An  envoy  is  sent  by  thc  Latins  to  Bolicit  the  aid  of  Dlomcd,  -who  has  Bcttlcd 
in  Apulia  and  founded  Argyripa.  Aencas  is  adviBed  by  tho  god  of  the  Tiber,  who  ap- 
pcars  to  liim  in  eleep,  to  seck  assit-tanee  from  Kvandor,  an  Arcadian  princc,  lately  cs- 
tablislied  al  Pallantcum,  aftcrwards  the  ralatine  Hill,  on  tho  Tiber.  On  the  point  of 
departinfi;  on  this  mission,  Aeneas  sees  tho  bow  with  hcr  tliirtj'  young  on  thc  shore,  the 
omen  mcntioned  by  Ilelonus.  He  ascends  tlie  Tiber,  wliieh  has  Blaclicnod  his  eurrcnt 
to  favor  him,  aiid  at  niidday  comea  in  eight  of  thc  ralatino,  and  tlio  settlcment  of 
Evander. 

1,  2.  Si^nniu  e\tu]it;  Virgil,  according  to  tlie  Konian  custom,  roprcsentg 
Turnus  as  ruising  tlie  rod  banncr,  tlic  signal  of  war,  from  tbe  battlcments  of 
Laurentum. 3>  Concnsslt,  Impnllt ;  hc  roused,  urged  on ;  i.  e.  cum  son» 


BOOK   EIGHTH.  553 

tornuwn. 8t  Vastant — agros;  strip  the  fields  of  their  Jmahandmen. 9i 

Urbem ;  Argyripa,  which  the  hero,  Diomed,  foimded  in  Apulia,  on  returning 

from  the  Trojau  war,  and  flecing  from  Argos  and  Aetolia  to  Italy. 10. 

Qai  =  u^  is ;  hence  the  subjunctives  following.     Gr.  §  264,  5. 11.  Aenc- 

an  5  the  subject  of  the  infinitives,  advectum  (esse),  inferre,  and  dicere. 

13>  Regem  se  posci;  that  he  is  demanded  as  king ;  i.  e.  of  Latium. 27. 

Aiitnnm  ;  a  lengthened  form  of  alitum.    See  Gr.  §  83,  R.  2. 37.  KeTelris ; 

who  bringcst  back ;  for  the  Dardanian  race  sprung  from  Italy. IVobis ; 

for  ad  nos  ;  plural  for  the  singular. 41.  Concessere  ;  have  come  to  an  end. 

47.  Ex  quo ;  from  which  time ;  in  thirty  years  from  the  time  of  the 

discovery  of  this  omen.     Others  undcrstand  loco  ;  "  proceeding  from  which 

place  Ascanius  shall  found,"  &c. 51.  Pailante ;  Pallas  was  an  ancient 

prince  of  Arcadia.  Virgil,  hke  other  Roman  writers  who  had  studied  the 
Grecian  Uteiature,  foUowing  the  Greek  notion  that  there  were  Pelasgic  set- 
tlements  in  Italy,  derives  the  word  Palatium  from  the  Arcadian  Pallantium, 
and  Pallas,  and  hence  supposes  an  Arcadian  eraigration  to  the  valley  of  the 

Tiber. 54.  Pallantenm ;  the  supposed  original  name  of  the  city  on  the 

Palatine,  of  which  Palatium  would  be  a  corrupted  form. 57.  Recto  flu- 

mine ;  by  the  direct  course  of  the  stream.     Comp.  vi.  900. 65.    Here  (ou 

the  banks  of  this  stream)  my  great  dwellitig-place,  head  of  lofty  cifies,  is  des- 
tined  to  rise.  The  refei-ence  is  to  Rome,  which  may  be  regarded  as  already 
rising ;  hence  cxii.  Servius  understood  by  domus  the  palace  of  the  river 
god,  and  caput,  the  source  of  the  river ;  thus,  my  head-waters  are  from  lofty 

cities ;  i.  e.  those  of  Etruria. 66.  Lacn ;  here,  the  bed  of  the  river. 

77.  Cornlger ;  river  gods  were  sometimes  represented  with  the  heads  and 
horns  of  bulls;  thus,  Georg.  iv.  3*71,  Gemina  taurino  corniia  vultu  Eridanus. 

^78.   Propins ;   more  surely,   more   tangibly   than  in  a  dream. 84. 

Euim ;  certainly ;  of  course,  as  he  ought,  or  as  was  to  be  expected.  He 
follows  the  instructions  of  Helenus,  iii.  437-440,  and  of  Tiberinus,  above,  60. 

87.  Reflncns ;  flowing  back  on  his  course,  so  as  to  stay  the  downward 

current. 89.  Aeqaor  aqnis.    See  on  v.  821. 90.   Rnmore  secnndo; 

joined  with  celerant,  it  is  commonly  understood  of  the  soug  of  the  oarsmen, 
chanted  to  the  movement  of  their  oars ;  withjoyful  shout.  In  sorae  editions 
the  words  are  joined  with  labitur,  and  then  refer  to  the  roaring  of  the  water, 
which  attends  the  swift  passage  of  thc  keel.     Secmido  in  either  case  denotes 

an  accompanying  or  following  sound,  with  the  notion  of  favoring. 98. 

Procnl  lengthens  the.  final  syllable  here. 

102-1S3.  Evander  and  his  peoplc  are  engagort,  at  the  moment  wheu  Aenoas  arrives. 
In  celebrating  a  Baoriflce  to  Hercules.  Palkis,  the  son  of  Evander,  at  flrst  threatens  to 
resist  the  landing  of  the  straiigera  ;  but  their  frieudly  character  being  ascertained,  they 
are  invited  into  the  preseiice  of  tlie  kiiig,  who  listens  with  favor  to  the  proposition  of 
allianoe,  and  promises  assistance  to  the  Trojans.  They  are  then  invited  to  joln  tho 
ArcadianB  in  their  religious  festival. 

108.  Amphitryoniadae.    Hercules  is  so  called  from  his  stcp-father,  Am- 
24 


554  NOTES   ON    THE    AENEID. 

phitryon,  the  husband  of  Alcmena. 104.  Bnlc  nna ;  poetic  construction 

{or  rtna  cum  hoc. 108.  Tacltls  incnmberc  Ytm\?,  =  taciti  inc.  rcm;   ply 

their  oars  in  silencc. 110.  Qnos ;  those  who  wero  attcnding  the  feaat. 

114,  Qni  gonns;  who  by  descent;  of  v:h.at  descent?  fjenus,  Grceli  acc. 

l'nde  donio  ;  for  ex  qua  domo. 118.  Bcllo  snpcrbo ;  bi/  an  nnrigltt- 

eoua  war;  a  war  wiiich  is  occasioncd  by  tliuir  pride  and  arrogance  in  dcny- 

in»  us  a  shelter  in  their  country. 130.  Conjnnctns  Atridis;   both  the 

Atridae  and  Evandcr  are  descended  from  Jupiter ;    the  Atridae  through 

Tantalus,  and  Evander  through  Mercury. 132.  Ccgnati  patrcs;  Aeneas 

is  doscended  from  Elcctra,  a  daughter  of  Atlas,  and  the  raother  of  Dardanus ; 

Evander  from  Maia,  anotlier  daughtcr  of  Atlas,  and  mother  of  Mercury. 

133.  Et  fatis  egcre  TOlentem ;  and  have  impelled  me  (to  you)  by  my  fates, 

(myself )  icilling  (to  obey) ;  while  I  myself  gladly  oboy  their  behest. 

146.  Dannia ;  Turnus  was  the  son  of  Daunus,  and  hence  the  term  Daunia 
is  not  inaptly  applied  to  the  whole  gens,  or  nation,  of  which  hc  is  at  present 

the  leading  spirit. 149.  Snpra,  infra ;  the  upper  sea  is  the  Adriatic,  the 

lower  the  Tuscan. 151.  Rebus  spectata;  tried  by  warlike  deeds. 157. 

Hesionae  rcgna  ;  the  reahns  ofhis  sister  Hesione  ;  Telamon,  king  of  Salamis, 
an  island  of  Attica,   married  Ilesione,   the  daughter  of  Laomedon,   and 

eister  of  Priam. 159.  Gel-dos;  Arcadia,  as  a  mountainous  country,  is 

comparatively  cold. 165.  Phcnci ;  Pheneus  was  an  Arcadian  town  near 

Mount  Cyllene. 169.  Blilii ;  dat.  of  the  agent;  hy  me.     Gr.  §  225,  ii. ; 

Z.  g419. 172.  Qnando  ;  since. 117.  Praccipnnm.    Aeneas  is  honored 

above  his  followers  by  being  placed  upou  a  couch  covered  with  the  hide  of 

a  lion ;  the  frame  of  the  couch  is  of  maple  wood. 178.  Solio ;  dat.  for 

ad  solium. 180.  Viscera;  theflesh;  as  in  i.  211. 181.  Laboratac  Cc- 

reris;  bread. 183.  Pcrpetni ;  m7A /oji^r  6o(fy. Lnstralibns;  expiatory  ; 

pertaining  to  the  cxpiatory,  or  lustral  sacrifice. 

183-279.  Evander  now  esplaiuB  to  Aeneas  tho  origin  of  tliin  annual  Baerifice  to  Ilcr- 
cules,  by  relating  tlie  story  of  Cacus,  a  giant  of  Mount  Avcntinus,  -wiiom  the  hero  haJ 
elain  on  this  spot. 

190.  Saxis  snspensam  hanc  rnpem  ;  this  crag  suspended  on  the  rocks. 

191.  Hlontis  domns ;  the  now  empty  cave  on  Mouut  Avcntine,  which  had 

beeu  the  abode  of  Cacus. 194.  Semihominis ;    hcre  sem-ho-mi-nis. 

200.    Et  uobis ;    to  «s  also ;    as  wcll  to  others  who  wcre    sufiering  from 

monstcrs. Aliqnando  ;  at  lcngth. 202.  Gcryone.    Soc  on  vii.  6G2. 

203.  Ilac;  this  way. 204.  Amncni;  the  bank  of  thc  river  is  meant. 

207.  Stiibnlis;  from  ihe  camp ;  i.  e.  froni  their  resting  and  fceding  place  ia 

tlie  ^alley. 209.  Pcdlbns  rcctls ;  froin  thcir  advancing  fect ;  ablat.  al>- 

sulute.'        212.  Qnacrenll ;  an  indcfinito  dativc,  limiting  the  wholc  clause. 

215.  Disfcssu  ;   at  their  departure  ;  ablat.  of  time. 218.  Cnstodita; 

tliougli  guarded. 221.  AcFil.     The  Aventine,  even  now,  is  quite  a  bold 

eininencc,  especially  towards  the  rivcr,  though  much  diminished  from  iti> 
otiginal  height. 22Q.    Paterna;    his  fathcr^s;    Vulcau'a. 228.     Tlif 


BOOK   EIGHTH. 


555 


final  e  in  this  verse  is  elided. 235.  Dirarnm  ;  carnon  birds. 237.  Ni« 

tens ;  i.  e.  -witli  his  shoulders. 245.  Snper ;  from  above. 248.  Insaeta 

rndcntcm  ;  roaring  hideoushj. 259.  Vana  ;  because  thcy  avail  not  against 

Hercules. 260.  In  nodnm  complcxns;  forcing  his  body  and  limbs  by  hia 

powerful  grasp  into  a  knot. Angit  clisos  ocnlos.    Hercules  makes  the  mon- 

ster's  eycs  start  out  by  clioking  him. 

263.  Abjnratae;  the  possession 

of  which   he   had  denied. 268. 

Ex  illo ;   from  that   time. Pri- 

mns — anctor,  etc. ;  Potitius  thefirst 
insiitutor,  and  the  Pinarian  house, 
the  guardian  of  the  worshij)  of  Ilcr- 
cules,  estahlished  this  altar  in  the 
grove.  Both  the  Potitian  and  Pina- 
rian  famiUes  were  engaged  from  the 
first  in  this  worship  of  Hercules  at 

Rome. 274.    Porgite;    for  por- 

rigite. 276.   Bicoior  ;   referring 

to  the  silvery  color  of  the  poplar  Silver  goblet. 

leaf  on  the  under  side  and  the  green  on  the  other. 

280-368.  After  completing  the  rites  of  Hercules,  Evander  conducts  Acneaii  to  tbfl 
city,  and  points  out  to  him  the  plaees  of  interest  around,  aud  cntertains  him  for  the 
night  in  his  dwelling. 

285.  Salii.     The  Salii  were  appoiuted  priests  of  Mars  by  king  Numa; 

perhaps  originally  they  were  priests  of  Hercules. 288.  Novcrcae ;  Juno. 

291.  Oechaliam;  destroyed  by  Hercules  because  Eurytus  refuscd  hira 

his  daughter  lolc. Mille ;   here   a  round  number. 293.  Bfnbigcnas ; 

the  Centaurs  were  the  sons  of  Ixion  and  a  cloud. 302.  Dcxter;  auspi' 

cious. 315.     That  the  aborigines  of  different  countries  sprung  from  the 

rocks  and  trees  was  a  coramon  notion. 317.  Parcere  parto  ;  to  spare  what 

was  acquired;    to  be  provident. 322.    Composnit ;    assembled. 326. 

Decolor  ;  of  debased  colm' ;  an  age  of  baser  metal  than  gold ;  i.  e.  the  brazen 

age. 329.  Posnit ;  for  deposuit ;  laid  aside  its  name  of  Saturnia,  and  then 

Ausonia,  and  several  others,  which  successively  gave  place  to  ncwer  names. 

332.    Diximns;    we  Italiayis  called  it.      Albula  (as  it  was  originally 

called)  lost  its  true  name. 336.  Carmentis ;  an  Italian  divinity,  here  as- 

signed  to  Arcadia. 338.     The  porta  Carmentalis  in  Eome  was  at  the 

foot  of  the  CapitoUne  hill.     The  order  of  the  words  is  et  portam,  quam  Ro- 

mani  Carmentalem  memorant. 339.  Bonorem.     The  name  of  this  gate 

was  an  honor  to  the  nymph,  dating  from  the  earhest  times. 342.  Asylnm  ; 

a  grove  on  the  Capitol,  consecrated  by  Romulus  as  a  place  of  rcfuge,  soon 

after  the  building  of  Rome. 343.  Lnpcrcal ;  a  cave  on  the  Palatiue,  sa 

cred  to  Pan;  named  after  the  Parrhasian  manner  of  the  Lycacan  Pan; 
that  is,  named  Lupcrcal  frora  lupus  aftcr  the  analogy  of  AvKaios,  Lycaeiis, 


556  NOTES   ON    THE    AENEID. 

the  Arcadian  appellation  of  Pan,  which  is  here  fancicd  to  come  from  \vkos 
Ovid,  however,  Fast.  ii.  423,  424,  derives  the  Greeli  term  from  Mount  Ly. 
caeus  in  Arcadia.  Farrhasio  is  frora  Parrhasia,  a  town  in  Arcadia.— — 
345.  Argileti ;  thc  Argilctum  was  a  spot  at  the  foot  of  the  Capitoliue  hill. 
The  name  was  supposed  to  be  derived  from  Argi  and  letum,  aud  to  coni- 
memorate  the  murder  of  Argos,  a  guest  of  Evander,  wlio  had  been  put  to 
death  by  some  of  the  people,  without  the  ]dng's  Ivnowledge.  Evander  calls 
the  place  to  witness  his  innocence  of  the  miirder,  testatur  locum,  while  hc 

recounts  the  history  of  it,  docet  letum. 347.    Capitolia ;  the  Capitoline, 

afterwards  covered  with  the  huildings  of  the  Capitol,  of  which  the  chief  was 
the  teniple  of  Jupiter,  roofed  with  plates  of  gold.— ^ — 358.  Janicalnm ;  the 
name  of  the  hill  opposite  to  the  Capitol  and  on  the  right  banl:  of  the  rivcr ; 
higher  than  any  of  the  seven  hills.  This  was  supposed  to  be  the  site  of  an 
ante-historic  town  founded  by  Janus.  Anothcr  town  of  the  same  period, 
called  Saturnia,  was  supposed  to  have  existed  on  the  Capitoline  hill.     It  is 

highly  probable  that  these  traditions  were  not  unfounded. 361.  Carinis; 

the  Carinae  was  a  quarter  or  street  of  Rome  on  the  Esquiline,  occupied  by 
wealthy  citizens;  hence  lautae,  elegaiit. 367.  Ingentem.     Comp.  vi.  413. 

369-453.  "WTiile  Aeneas  is  reposing  under  the  hnmble  roof  of  Evander,  Venus  ap- 
plies  to  her  husband,  Vulcan,  fo.  a  suit  of  armor  for  her  son  ;  which  the  god  of  the 
forge,  on  rising  from  eleep,  orders  the  Cyclops  to  make  ready.  He  himself  directs 
their  labor  in  his  workshop  in  the  Vulcaniau  islands,  near  the  coast  of  Sicily. 

372.   Anrco ;   au-ryo. 375.    DeWta ;  fated;    destined  io  destruction. 

Comp.  ix.  10*7. 381.  Constitit;   is,  or  Aeneas,  is  the  subject. 382. 

Eadeni ;  the  same ;  who,  as  just  said,  made  no  request  for  your  aid  duriug 

the  siege  of  Troy. Sanctnm  mihi  nnmcn  rogO ;  I  ask  of  thy  divinity  which 

is  sacredly  bound  to  me ;  that  is,  as  thy  spouse. 383.  Filia  Nerei ;  the 

daughter  of  Nereus  ;  Thetis,  who  had  obtained  from  Vulcan  a  suit  of  arms 
for  Achilles,  her  son.     The  wife  of  Tithonus,  Aurora,  had  secured  the  same 

favor  for  Memnon.     See  i.  489. 385.  Mocnia  ;  cities. 391.  Tonitrn  ; 

Forbiger  makes  this  an  ablative  of  manner,  cum  tonitru ;  others  of  place; 

eithcr  in  or  forth  from  the  thunder  cloud.     Join  corusco  with  lumine. 

Rnpta  ignea  rima;  thc  ficry  crack  Iroken;  tlie  lightning-Jiash  breaking ; 
that  is,  breaking  open  the  clouds  themsclvcs.  Comp.  iii.  199,  rttptis  nubi- 
bus.  The  lightning  often  appcars  like  a  zig-zag  chiuk  or  crack  suddenly 
running  athwart  thc  clouds ;  percurrit  nimbos.-  — 395.  Ex  alto ;  far  draion; 

reasons  remote. 399.  Decem  alios ;  the  fates  would  have  pcrmitted  thc 

siege  of  Troy  to  bc  Icngthened ;  they  had  only  decrecd  the  dcstruction  of 
the  city  sooner  or  latcr,  without  fixing  any  hmit  to  the  duration  of  the  siege. 

402.    Eleetro  ;    from   ^KeKTpoy,  with  the  first  syllablc  shortened.     It 

was  a  mixture  of  gold  and  silver  in  such  proportion  (four  parts  of  gold  to 

one  of  sllver)  as  to  havc  tlic  color  of  ainber. 403.  Auimac  ;  thc  blasts  of 

the  forgc. 107,  408.  Medio  jam  abactac  coiTicnlo  ;  already  convcyed  froir, 

(beyoud)  thc  midst  of  hcr  course.     Comp.  iii.  512. 409i  Tenai  Mincrva ; 


BOOK    EIGHTH. 


557 


\mth  the  scanty  loom  ;  the  loom  which  brings  but  a  scanty  living  to  the  poor 

weaver. 417.  Liparca  5  Lipara ;  one  of  the  Aeolian  or  Liparian  islands. 

The  island  of  Vulcan  is  in  the  south  part  of  the 
group,  now  called  Vulcano,  and  containing  the 

tOTvn  of  Vulcanello. 419.  Aetnaea;  like  those 

of  Aetna. lacndibns  ;  ablat.  of  place  ;  (made) 

on  the  anvil. 421.  Stricturae  Chalybom ;  the 

masses  of  iron.     The  Chalybes  were  a  people  of 

Pontus,  skilful  workers  of  iron. 422.  Domns  ; 

in  apposition  with  insula. 423.  Hoc ;  an  old 

form  for  hiic. 425.  Brontesqae ;  for  the  quan- 

tity  of  the  final  e,  here  long,  see  Gr.  §  283,  iv.  Rem. 

426.  laformatnm;  unfinished. 427.    For 

the  form  oiVaQfuhnen  see  p.  523. 435.  Aegi- 

da ;  the  accompanying  wood-cut  iUustrates  the 

form  of  the  Aegis. 436.  Sqaaaiis — polibant ; 

were  ornamenting  with  polished  golden  scales. 

448,  449.  Septenos — impedinnt ;  they  weld  togeth- 
er  orhs  upon  orbs  (literally,  orbs  with  orbs)  seven 
in  number.  The  shield  is  made  of  seven  circular 
plates  of  metal  joined  plate  upon  plate,  in  order 

to  secure  the  proper  thickness  and  strength. 

453.  In  nnmeram;  in  order ;   each  striking  his  The  Aegis. 

blow  in  turn,  and  in  regular  time. ^Yersant ;  while  the  blows  are  alter- 

nately  given  by  two,  the  mass  is  turned  from  side  to  side  on  the  anvil  by 
the  third  workman. 

454-553.  Evander  and  Aeneas  in  tho 
moming  confer  togetlier.  Evander  advis- 
es  Aeneas  to  seek  the  aid  of  the  Etrurians, 
who  have  thrown  off  the  authority  of  tha 
wicbed  king  Mezentius,  at  the  same  timo 
placing  under  his  command  all  the  forces 
he  himself  can  raise,  and  with  them  his 
Bon  Pallas.  While  they  are  engaged  in 
this  conference  the  clang  of  gleaming 
armor  and  the  sound  of  a  trumpet  aro 
heard  in  the  sky.  Aeneas  sends  hack  a 
part  of  his  followers  to  Ascanius  with 
tidings  of  his  success,  while  with  tho  rest 
he  prepares  to  depart  into  Etruria. 

454»  Leainius  ;  Vulcan,  according 
to  mythology,  was  cast  from  heaven 
and  fell  upon  the  island  of  Lemnos, 
where  he  was  nurtured,  and  after-  Vulcan  at  his  forge. 

wards  worshipped  as  the  tutelary  deity  of  the  island. 456.  Volacrum  j 

Toof-swallows  are  meant. 457.  Artus.     Gr.  §  234,  ii. ;  Z.  §  458. 458t 


558  NOTES   ON    THE   AENEID. 

Tjrrhena ;  the  sandal  hcre  is  called  Tyrrhenian,  as  the  trumpet,  below,  526, 
eithcr  as  appellatives  in  conimon  use,  indicatlng  the  origin  of  these  thinga 
among  thc  JRoniaus,  or  clse  it  is  understood  that  Evander  has  adopted 
them  from  the  Etrurians.      The  former  explanation  is  the  more  reason- 

able. 461.  Limiiic  ab  alto;   to  be  understood  litcrally.     The  threshold 

was  elevated  from  the  ground. 4C1,  462.  Gemini  cnstodes  canes;   two 

dogs  guardians  (of  the  house.) 463.    Sccreta  ;    the  retircment. 468. 

Licito ;  now  at  length  the  important  conference  was  permiited  by  the  cir- 

cumstances. 472.  Pro  tanto  nominc ;  for  such  reputation  or  name  as  is 

ascribed  to  me,  the  aid  I  can  afford  is  small. 473.  Tnseo ;   the  Tiber 

is  frequently  called  Tuscan,  because  it  rises  in  Etruria  and  flows  along  its 

borders. 475.  Popnlos;  the  Etrurians  were  divided  into  twelve  nationa 

or  populi,  each  having  its  own  king,  or  lucumo,  and  when  assembled  for 
war,  one  of  the  lucumones  was  appointed  chief.  Their  camp,  or  army,  being 
thus  made  up,  is  opulent,  or  strong  in  kingdoms ;  made  up  of  many  royal 

armies. 479.  Trbis  Igyllinac  ;.  Caere.     See  on  vii.  652. Lydia.     See 

on  ii.  "781. 481.  Deinde ;   then  or  afterwards;  join  with  tenuit ;    this 

(city,)  which  was fourishing  many  i/ears,  Mezentius  afterwards  held,  &c. 

489.  Infanda ;   adverbially. 492.     I  have  removed  the  commas  some- 

times  printcd  here  aftcr  ille  am^.  elapsus,  as  this,  in  the  opinion  oi  Jahn,  was 
the  proper  punctuation,  though  he  did  not  leave  them  out  in  his  own  edi- 

tion. 493.     The  infinitives   here  are  historical.      Defendicr ;   old  form 

of  infinit.  passive ;  as  in  iv.  493. 497.  Pnppcs ;  for  populi.     They  are 

assembled  on  the  sea-shore  not  far  frora  Caere,  ready  to  sail  for  the  coast 

of  Latium,  near  Ardea. 499.  Maeoniac ;  an  aucient  name  of  Lydia. 

502.  Snlynnierc ;  to  subject,  ov  to  command. 504.  Hoc;  Evander  points 

across  the  Tibcr  in  the  direction  of  Caere,  where  the  Etrurians  are  encamped. 
Their  territory  extends  to  the  Tiber,  opposite  Evander ;  hence  hoe  campo. 

506.  Tarclion;  the  Lucumo  in  temporary  command  of  the  Etrurians. 

507.  Sncccdam  ;  requcsting  that  I  proceed  to  the  camp  ;  ut  is  omitted. 

508.  Saeclis;  by  many  years. 511.  Ilim;  from  this  cou7itry  ;  Italy  ; 

hence  not  completely  externus,  as  rcquired  by  the  soothsayer. 523.  Ni ; 

thc  apodosis  is  suggested  by  putabant ;  they  were  pondering  many  stern 
thouglUs  in  tha^r  anxious  hcarts,  and  would  have  continued  thus  pondcring, 

unless,  &c. 525.  Rnerc ;  io  be  in  commotion.     The  flashing  of  arms  in 

the  sky,  the  sound  of  trumpcts,  and  othcr  warlikc  tokcns,  in  the  heaven.s, 
were  not  unfrequent  to  the  imagination  of  the  Romans,  as  mentionod  by 

Livy  and  othcr  historians.   Scc  Liv.  B.  xxii.  1. 529.  Per  sndum;  through 

the  clearsky  ;  thougli  the  arms  themselvcs  wcrc  surrounded  by  a  cloud. 

531.  Promissa;  the  promise  is  not  beforc  mcntioned  in  the  poem. 533. 

Olympo  ;  for  ab  Olympo ;  by  Olympus ;  the  heavenly  tokcn  summons  mc,  is 

intended  for  mc,  not  for  thce. 542.  llercaleis  ignibns;  Acncas  procccds 

at  once  to  tlic  ara  maxima,  or  grcat  altar  of  Ilcrcules,  whcre  the  worship 
bad  bccn  conductcd  on  the  previous  day,  aud  there,  as  tho  one  to  whom  the 


BOOK    EIGHTH, 


559 


Bupernatural  sign  had  been  sent,  he  renews  the  altar  fires,  and  makcs  offer- 
ings  first  to  Hercules,  as  the  dcity  of  the  place,  and  then  to  the  household 
gods  of  Evander,  who  have  received  and  sheltered  him,  a  stranger,  and  who 

had  also  been  inchjded  in  the  saered  honors  of  the  day  before. 547.  In 

bdla  ;  on  warlike  perils  ;  not  actual  war. 552.  Exsortem ;  not  drawn  by 

lot  like  the  rest ;  therefore  egregium  ;  insignem. 553.  Aureis ;  au-ryis. 

554-607.  The  parting  interview  between  Evander,  Aeneas,  and  Pallas,  and  the  ar- 
rival  of  Aeneas  at  the  camp  of  the  Etrurians  near  Caere. 

555.  Regis;  Mezentius. 558.  Enntis;  supply//a;  it  is  suggested  by 

pater. 569,  570.  Finitimo  huie  capiti ;  this  perso7t  reigning  near  him  ; 

me  his  neighbor. 576.   In  nnnm;   to  a  meeting. 579.   Abrnmpere. 

Comp.  iv.  631. 588.  Pictis  armis ;  the  Arcadians  painted  their  shields 

with  symbolic  figures. 589.  Perfnsns  nnda;  bedewed  wifh  the  wave  ;  just 

risen  from   the   ocean. 597.  Cacritis  amnem ;  the  river  of  Caere ;  the 

river  running  by  the  town  of  Caere,  called  also  Caeritanus,  and  now  Yacina. 

599.  Nemns ;  object  of  inclusere  and  cingunt ;    the  circUng  hills  sur- 

round  the  wood  {lucus,  or  nemus)  through  which  tlie  river  runs. 601. 

Diemqne ;  and  a  festal  day ;  a  day  set  apart  to  his  worship. 60i.  De 

colle ;  the  whole  Tyrrhenian  army  {legio)  could  be  seen  from  the  hill,  ap- 
peared  to  the  view  from  the  hill,  where  it  was  encamped.  Comp.  iii.  647. 
De  colle  is  not  the  position  of  the  spectator,  Aeneas,  but  that  of  the  object 
beheld,  namely,  the  Etrurian  army. 607.  Snccednnt ;  ascend. 

608-730.  Venus  brings  to  Aenoas  the  shield  wrought  by  Vulcan,  and  adorned  with 
raised  work  lllustratlng  the  follo-wing  events  and  scenes  in  Roman  history  :  1,  the  sto- 
ry  of  Romulns  and  Remus  ;  2,  the  rape  of  the  Sabine  women  ;  3,  the  punishmeut  of 
Mettius  Fufetius  ;  4,  siego  of  Rome  by  Porsena  ;  5,  Manlius  and  the  Gauls  ;  6,  a  pi-o- 
cossion  of  the  priests  of  Mars  and  Pan  ;  7,  the  punishment  of  Catiliue  ;  8,  the  battle  of 
Actium  ;  9,  triumph  of  Augustus. 

610.  Gelido  seeretnm 
flamine ;  by  the  cool 
stream  apart  (from  his 

foUowers.) 630.  Fe- 

cerat  et ;  he  had  also 
represented ;  in  this 
eense  facere  takes  the 
infinitive  after  it. 
633.  Sine  more;  con- 
trary  to  the   usage   of 

nations ;    lawlessly. 

636.  Consessn  eayeae; 

in  tke  assembly  of  the 

eircus ;  the  word  cavea, 

tlieatre,     is      employed  Romulus  and  Remns. 

here  for  circus. 644.  Tollns ;  TuUus  Hostillus,  the  third  king  of  Romc. 


560 


NOTES   ON   THE   AENEID. 


647.  Acclpere ;  supply  iUos,  the  Romans,  as  the  subject. 648.  Ae- 

neadae;  here  for  Romans. 652.  In  samnio  ;  on  the  top  of  the  shield;  od 

the  iipper  part  of  the  orb  as  it  stood,  or  as  it  would  appcar  when  held  up 

before  the  warrior  in  battle. 654.   Eecens  regia ;    the  palace  (always) 

fresh  ;  the  hut  of  Romulus,  built  in  tlie  first  days  of  Rome,  was  always  re- 
newed  by  thc  Romaus  whenever  its  thatch  had  decayed,  and  therefore  it 

was  alnays  rccens,  as  represented  on  the  shield. 660.  Virgatis;  the  small 

cloaks  of  the  Gauls  were  striped. 663.  Lnpercos ;  priests  of  Pan. 

664.  Lanigeros ;  the  pealc  on  the  cap  of  the  Salian  priest,  or  priest  of  Mars, 

was  cncircled  at  the  base  by  a  flock  of  wool. 670.  SecretOS ;  scparated, 

placed  apart  from  Tartarus. 671.  Inter  ;  the  battle  of  Actium  perhaps 

filled  up  tbe  centre  of  the  shield. 676.  Erat;  it  was  possible  to  see;  Ht- 

erally,  there  was  a  seeing.     See  on  vi.  596. 680,  681.  Tcmpora  flammas 

Tomnnt ;  referring  to  the  ornaments  on  his  helmet. Piitrinm  TCrtice  si« 

ilns ;  a  star,  r«presenting  the  "  Julian  star,"  appears  in  the  bas-relief  work 

just  over  tlie  hea-d  of  Augustus.     A  comet  appeared  in  the  heavens  while 

Augustus  was  celebrating  the  games  in  honor  of  Caesar,  which  was  supposed 

to  contain  the  soul  of  Caesar.     This  is  the  JuUiun,  here  pa- 

trium,  sidus.    Augustus  was  the  adopted  son  of  Caesar. 688. 

Conjnx  ;  Cleopatra,  the  paramour  of  Antony. 692.  Cycladas. 

See  iii.  127. 60b.  Sistro;*the  sistrum ;  a  small  m'usical  in- 

strument  of  iron,  used  in  the  worship  of  Isis. 697.  Angaes ; 

there  is  a  reference  here  to  the  asps  which  Cleopatra  is  said 

to  have  used  as  the  instrumeuts  of  her  death. 698.  Mon- 

stra ;  the  Egyptian  gods  had  the  heads  of  beasts ;  Anubis  that 
of  a  dog;   hence  latrator.     These  are  represented  as  fighting 

against  the  gods  of  Rom«. 710.  lapyge  ferri ;  to  be  carried 

Anubis.     Jy  the  lapyx ;  or  north-west  T¥ind. 712.    Tota  YCSte  T0ean« 

tem ;    inviting  with   all  his   (unfolded)   mantle ;    the  god  of  the   Nile   is 

represented  as  opening  his  ample  robes  to 

receive  the  fugitives. 725.  Lelegas   €a- 

rasqnc;  the  early  inhabitants  of  the  west 
coast  of  Asia  Minor ;  put  here  for  the  peo- 

ple  of*Asia  Minor  in  gcneral. Gelonos ;  a 

people   in   the    south    of   Russia. 727» 

Morini ;  a  Gallic  tribe  on  the  coast  of  the 

British  channel. ^Bicornis ;  said  with  ref- 

crcnce  to  the  two  principiU  outlets  of  the 

Rhine,   thc   Vahalis  and  Rhenus. 728» 

Dahac ;  a  people  on  the  Oxus,  east  of  th^ 

Caspian. Araxes ;  a  river  of  Asia,  flow* 

ing  into  thc  Cuspiau  sea. 


Nilc,  as  a  river  god 


BOOK   NINTH. 


^61 


BOOK  IX. 

The  attack  of  Turniis  on  tlie 
Trojan  camp. 

1-76.  Iris,  as  thc  agent  of  Jnno,  encourages 
Turnns  to  attack  the  Trojan  camp  in  the  absence 
of  Aeneas.    On  the  approach  of  Tumus,  the  Tro- 
Jans  determine  to  follow  the  parting  directions  of  K 
Aeneas,  not  to  sally  forth  from  the  gates  in  case    \^ 


of  attack,  but  to  act  on  the  defensive.  Tumus, 
exasperated  at  the  inaction  of  the  Trojans,  pre- 
pares  to  set  fire  to  their  ships. 

1.  Dirersa  parte  ;  in  a  different  quarter; 
referring  to  the  negotiations  of  Aeneas  at 
the  court  of  Evander,  and  at  the  camp  of 

the  Etrurians. 3i  Parentts ;  of  his  an- 

cestor.  Pilumnus  was  the  abavus,  or  great- 
great-grandfather  of  Turnus.     See  x.  619. 

5.  Tliaiinianttas ;  Iris  is  so  called  as  the  Head  of  Juno. 

■  daughter  of  Thaumas,  son  of  Ocean  and  Earth. Ot  Pettt;  the  prcsent, 

because  the  action  is  still  continuing.     The  last  syllable  is  lengthened  here 

by  the  arsis. 10.  Corythi.    See  on  iii.  167. 11.  LydorDm ;  for  Tus- 

corum.    See  on  ii.  TSl. 18.  IVnbibns  actam  ;  conveyed  by  the  clouds  ;  -well 

said  of  Iris. 20.  Discedere  caelnm ;  Iris  seems  to  part  the  sky,  like  a 

curtain  of  heaven,  so  that  the  stars  comeinto  view. 23.  Hansit;  Turnus 

drew  water  to  -nash  his  hands  Avith,  before  making  his  prayer.     Comp.  .viii. 

09. 27.  Messapus.    See  vii.  691. 28.   Tvrrliidae.    See  rii.  484. 

29.    This  verse  appears  to  have  been  introduced  by  some  copyist,  who  took 

it  from  vii.  784. 30-32.     The  calm  and  regular  march  of  the  army  over 

the  plains  is  compared  to  the  quiet  current  of  a  great  river. Snrgens ; 

for  a  perfect  participle ;  as  linquens,  iii.  300 ;  having  risen  in  seven  tranquil 
Ureams ;  i.  e.  having  at  its  source  been  at  otice  divided  into  seven  branches. 

For  such  was  the  behef  of  the  ancients  in  regard  to  the  Ganges. Per 

tacitnm ;  in  sHence.     Per  is  often  thus  used  to  denote  manner. Alvco ; 

a  dissyllable  here. 39.  Condnnt  se  T. ;  the  Trojans  'nish  through  all  the 

gates  for  protection ;  those  vrho  happen  to  be  on  the  outside  of  the  camp, 
when  the  alarm  is  given  by  Caicus  from  the  battlement,  rush  in  through  the 
gates  and  thus  secure  themselves  from  the  enemy. — ^55,  56.  Jlirantnr  non 
dare  se  ;  they  {Twxnwa  and  his  io\\oy<evs)  wonder  at  the  ^inwarlike  spirit  of 

ihi  7roJans,  (and)  that  they  do  not  present  tliemselves  on  the  open  plain. 

64.  Ex  longo ;  supply  tempore ;  long,  for  a  long  time ;  join  with  collecta. 

68.  In  aeqnnm;  to  the  open  field;  as  opposed  to  the  closed  camp. 

70.     The  ships,  drawn  up  on  the  bank  of  the  river,  have  one  side  of  the 
camp  iu  their  rear,  while  the  river  protects  them  in  front.     Turnus  ap» 
proacheB  them  on  one  flank,  next  to  the  Tiher. 
24* 


56^  NOTES    ON    THE   AENEID. 

76-167.  Aftcr  invoking  tho  Mnscs,  tlie  poet  describos  the  interview  of  Cybole  ant] 
Jupiter,  which  occurrcd  at  the  time  when  the  ships  of  Aeneas  were  built  near  Phry- 
gian  Ida,  -when  Jupif  or  promiBcd  that  these  ehips,  after  their  arrival  in  Italy,  should 
be  transformed  into  Nymphs.  This  promise  is  now  fulfllled  in  the  sight  of  the  Rutuli 
Turuus,  however,  nothing  daunted,  regards  the  omen  as  favorable  to  his  own  cause 
and  his  troojis  cncanip  for  tlie  night  on  the  plain. 

79.  Prisca  fides  facto,  etc. ;  credit  was  given  of  old  to  the  stort/,  but  the 

tradition  is  perpefuated,  and  is  more  and  more  believed. 86.  Arcc ;  the 

Biimmit  of  Mount  Ida  is  meant. 87.  Picea ;  with  the  pitch-plne. 88. 

JttTeui ;  Acneas. 94.  Istis ;  for  ihose  (sliips  of  yours.) 95,  96.  Im- 

mortaIe,fas;  the  right  of  immortality. Ccrtus;  siire  of  his  dcstiny. 

100.  Arva ;  for  in  arva.     See  on  i.  2. 104.  Stygii  fratris ;    Pluto. 

105.  Picc  torrentcs  ;  according  to  Heync,  Forbiger,  and  otbers,  boiling  loith 

pitch;  tbe  banks  wcre  washed  by  the  boiling  pitchy  flood. 111.  Ab  An- 

rora;  from  the  east. 112.  Idaei  chori;  the  Idaean  trains;  the  attendants 

of  the  goddess  Cybele. 118.  Pnppcs ;  the  sterns  are  towards  the  land. 

See  vi.  3-5. 121.  Beddant  se;  the  ships  have  plunged  into  the  river,  and 

disappeared  for  a  moment,  and  now  again  appear  on  the  surfacc  transformed 

into  Nymphs. 122.     This  versc  is  considcred  by  the  best  commentators 

an  interpolation. 125.    Banca ;    adverbialiy;    hoarsely.     See  on  i.  465. 

Ab  alto  ;  from  ihe  sea  ;  the  river  god  withholds  his  waters  a  while  from 

the  sea. 129,  130.  IVon — Ratnlos  ;  weapons  and  fire-brands  do  not  now 

await  or  call  for  the  action  of  the  Rutulians ;  the  Rutulians  have  no  necd  of 

omploying  these  in  the  destruction  of  the  ships. 131.  Rcrnm  pars  altcra; 

thc  one  part  of  thcir  hopes ;  that  final  refiige  which  they  had  on  thc  sea  is 
cut  off.     Thcy  havc  now  to  take  their  chance  on  land,  which  is  the  othcr 

part  of  thcir  fortunes,  or  hopes. 132.  GcntCS  ;  in  apposition  with  millia. 

139.  Dolor ;  the  wrong  of  Turnus  in  being  deprived  of  the  betrothed 

Lavinia,  is  similar  to  that  which  the  Atridae  sufifered  in  the  loss  of  Helen. 

qne  continues  the  force  of  the  negation ;  nor  is  it  the  lot  of  Mycenae 

alone  to  take  arms  for  the  recovery  of  a  ravished  wife,  and  to  wreak  vcn- 

geance  on  those  who  have  convcyed  hcr  away. 140.  Sed — cst ;  but  (some 

one  may  say)  it  is  enough  that  they  (thc  Trojans)  have  once  perishcd;  have 

perishcd  asanation. 140-142.  Pcccarc— feminenm  ;  Turnus  answers  the 

supposed  objcction  by  saying :  Ycs,  indced,  but  to  have  committcd  the  crime 
(ouce)  before,  (the  crime,  namely,  of  robbing  mcn  of  wivcs,)  should  have  bccn 
euough  for  them,  hating,  after  their  first  calamity,  almost  thc  whole  fcmalc 
race.  Any  othcr  race  of  men  would  have  been  dcterred  by  one  punish- 
ment,  but  thc  Trojans,  who  ought  to  dctcst  thc  whole  racc  of  women,  as 
the  cause  of  their  former  downfall,  even  after  losing  thcir  country,  commit 
the  Bame  ofrence.  If  then  they  commit  thc  ofTcnce  a  sccond  time,  thcy 
must  be  punishcd  a  sccond  timc'  by  a  similar  downfall.     This  is  the  intcr- 

pretatlon  of  Ileync,  followed  by  Forbigor. Perosos  agrees  with  eos,  the 

subject  of  ;)cocare. 154.  Faxo  ;  (or  fcccro;  I  will  havc  canscd ;  followcd 

by  the  eubjunctive;)?;^^??^-  thaf  thcy  thinh. LW.  Qnod  «npcrest;  (dnring 


BOOK   NINTH.  563 

that  portion  of  the  day)  which  remains. 159.  Portas;  this  word  and 

mocma  in  the  following  verse  show  that  the  Rutulians  proceed  to  form  a 
fortified  camp  after  the  Roman  manner,  beforc  they  retire  to  rest. 

16S-313.  The  Trojans  having  stationed  their  guards  for  the  night,  Nisus  and  Eury 
alus,  who  are  on  duty  together  as  sentinels,  agree  to  undertake  a  journey  by  night  in 
search  of  Aeneas,  and  they  proceed  to  the  council  of  chiefs,  in  osder  to  lay  their  plan 
before  them.  The  assembled  princes  approve  the  design  and  applaud  the  heroism  of 
the  two  youths.  Nisua  and  Euryalus  receive  presents,  and  with  the  prayers  and  good 
wishes  of  the  TTOjans  set  out  on  their  adventure. 

>>■. 
ITO.  Pontes ;  footways  of  plank  connecting  diSerent  parts  of  the  walls 

and  battlements. 176.    Nisus  and  Euryalus  have  becn  already  mentioned 

in  V.  294  sqq. 177.    Ida ;    a  nymph,  mother  of  Nisus. 185.  Dira ; 

strong,  wild;  a  poetic  use  of  the  word,  Hke  Znvos. 187.  Mhi;  the  dati- 

vm  ethicus. 194.  Si,  etc. ;  i/  they  (the  fathers)  promise  (shall  presently 

promise)  the  things  lohich  I  demandfor  thee  ;  I  will  demand  that  some  recom- 
pense  for  my  undertaking  shall  be  bestowed  on  thee,  content  myself  with 

the  glory,  whether  I  come  back  or  perish. ^195.  Tnmalo  sab  illo ;  U7ider 

the  rising  ground  yonder. 205.  Hic ;    for  meus ;  ihis  is  a  spirit  which 

despises  life.     Est  is  repeated  for  emphasis. 205,  206.  Et  qai  credat; 

and  (a  spirit  such)  that  it  believes. 210.  Qnae  mnita  ;  many  of  which  ac- 

cidents,  ov  which  things  ;  referring  to  casus. 214.  Solita  fortnna  ;  wonted 

fortune;  fortune  deceptive  as  she  is  wont  to  be.     Our  reading  is  that  of 
Wagner,  who  construes  the  foregoing  humo  in  the  dative.     Others  join  soli- 

ta  with  hu77io  as  an  ablative. 218.  Moenia  Aecstae.     See  v.  715  sqq. 

323.  Regem;  the  p7'i7ice;  Ascanius.     Comp.  reginac,  vi.  28. 232.  Fore ; 

dcpendent  on  dicentes,  impUed  in  07'a7it. 237.  Locnm  insidiis  conspexi- 

mns  ;  we  have  scen  a  pUice  for  our  stealthy  jour^icy.     Thiel  joins  the  dative 

with  the  verb, 238.  la  bivio  portac ;  m  the  double  road  diverging  frojii 

the  gate.     Froni  the  gate  ncarest  thc  sea  there  was  one  route  towards  thc 
south,  occupied  by  the  enemy,  another  passed  along  in  the  rear  of  their  camp, 

md  led  towards  Pallantium. 241.  Qaaesitom  ;  i7i  order  to  seek ;  the  su- 

pine  is  governed  by  uti.     The  active  supine  does  not  always  depend  on 

verbs  of  motion.     See  Gr.  §  276,  ii.  R.  1 ;  Z.  §  669. 243.  Aflfore  ;  Wag- 

ner  and  others  supply  nos  as  the  subject,     Ladewig,  however,  prefers  to 

make  Aenean  the»subject. 255.  Intcger  aevl.     Comp.  ii.  638. 260. 

Fides;  hope ;  confident  expectation. 268.  Praedae  dicere  sortcm ;  to  ap- 

poi7it  the  division  of  the  spoil.     Ducere,  givcn  in  some  editions,  is  less  ap- 

propriate  here. 273.  Omnibns ;  this  probably  is  meant  to  refer  only  to 

captivos,     li  matru77i  is  also  included,  arma  must  be  taken  in  a  general  sense 

for  inst7-uments  of  labor. 274.  Campi  qnod  ;  tohatever  of  la/id, 281, 

2S2.  Mc  dissimilem — cadat ;  no  day  (or  time)  shall  have  proved  me  unequat 
to  such  daring  exploits ;  p7'ovided  only  the  (present)  hopeful  opportu7iity  do 

mot  end  adverseli/. 288.  In  is  to  be  joined  with  salutatam ;  wisaluted. 

■' 291.  Tui;  the  final  vowel  is  unelided  h^e. 294.  Patriae  pietatis ; 


564  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

ofhis  love  for  liis  father  ;  his  owu  filial  affection  made  him  feel  morc  det-ply 

that  of  Euryalus. 296»  Sponde ;  promise  to  thyself;  be  assured  of  thiugs 

worthy,  &c.     The  reading  spondeo  is  not  so  well  authorized. S05.  Habl- 

lem  ;  fittedfor  use  ;  wellformed. 

314-366.  K^isuB  and  Eurj'a]u8  penetrate  into  tho  quartcrs  of  the  cnemy,  and  slaj 
many  of  them  whilo.buried  in  elumber. 

315.  Multis — exitio ;  (destined  to  perish,)  yet  about  to  bring  dcstruction 
{fo  befor  destruction)  to  many,  before  (they  perished.)  I  have  supposed  an 
cllipsis  of  morituri,  which  the  context  ^eems  natiirally  to  suggest.— — 319. 

Hyrtacides;  Nisus.     See  17Y. 329.  Jnxta;  near  by  Rhamnes. 337. 

Menibra ;  a  Greek  accusative  limiting  victus. Deo  ;  Bacchus ;  wine. 

343.  In  mcdlo  ;  in  the  midst ;  just  as  they  lay  directly  in  his  path. 348. 

Mnlta  morte  recepit;  drew  it  bach  from  the  deep  wound;  from  the  large 

wound  which  was  certain  death. 360.  Tibnrti ;  dative  of  Tiburs  ;  an  in- 

habitant  of  Tibur.       -361.  Jnngeret ;  supply  se. 363.  Post  mortem ;  af- 

ter  the  dea^h  of  the  grandson,  the  Rutulians  obtained  it  in  war  and  battle. 
365.  Habilem.    See  on  305. 

367-449.  Nisus  and  Euryalus  leavo  the  camp  of  the  enemy,  and  are  procoeding  on 
their  iourney,  when  tlie  hclmet  of  Euryalus,  gleaming  in  tho  obscurity  of  the  night, 
altracts  the  attention  of  a  hostile  party  of  horsemen,  who  are  just  approaching  the 
camp.  The  youths  flee  to  tho  woods.  Nisus  having  already  escaped,  misses  his 
friend,  and  returning  finds  him  surrounded  by  the  pursTjers.  He  kills  two  of  the  ene- 
my  with  javelins  liurled  from  his  place  of  concealment ;  and  thereupon  the  command- 
er,  Volscens,  lifts  his  sword  to  slay  Euryalus.  Nisus  rushes  into  the  midst,  but  too 
late  to  save  his  friend,  whoso  death,  however,  he  revenges  by  slaying  Volscens,  and 
tlien  falls  dead,  pierced  with  many  -wounds. 

368.  Cetera  legio ;  the  rest  of  the  army  ;  that  is,  the  "wholc  body  of  heavy 
iufantry  which  had  remained  in  the  rear,  and  to  carry  news  from  which 
the  three  hundred  horsemen  under  Volscens  had  been  despatched  during 

the  day  to  Turnus.     So  much  must  be  inferred,  though  not  narrated. 

369.  Regi — ferebant ;  they  were  hearing  a  reply  from  the  commander  of  the 
infantry  {legio)  to  Turnus  the  king.     Jiegi  is  preferred  here  by  the  best 

commentators  to  regis. 372.    Flectcntes  ;    supply  se. 374.  Immemo- 

rem  ;  unmindful ;  not  considering  that  his  helmet  would  thus  betray  thcm." 

377.  Nihil — contra;  they  made  no  attempt  to  reply. 386.   Imprndens; 

unconscious;  not  noticing  thc  absence  of  Euryalus. 388.  Aibanl ;  some 

part  of  the  wood,  called  by  Cicero,  pro  Mil.  31,  85,  and  Livy,  v.  15,  the  Al- 

bau  forest. 393.  Silentibns ;  hc  is  at  first  distant  from  the  enemy,  where 

the  woods  arc  still;  but  in  the  next  vcrse  he  comes  nearer;  hence  aridit. 

——401.     Pracsens  ;    propitious. 412.   Aversl;   turned  away ;   looking 

away  from  Nisus.— — 427.  Mc ;    supply   interfcite. 433.    Lcto;    ia  the 

dativo  for  in  letum,  according  to  sonic.  Thicl  profcrs  to  construe  it  in  the 
ablative.— — 449.  Patcr  Bomanns ;  t/ie  Jioman  citizen  ;  otbers  understanfl 
Anguslus.  _ 


BOOK   NINTH. 


565 


460-502.  Thc  Rutulian  horsemen  cut  offthe  heads  of  Nisus  and  Euryalus  and  bear 
them  with  the  body  of  Volscens  to  their  camp,  which  they  find  agitated  oii  account  of 
the  newly  discovered  slaughter  of  Rhamnes,  Serranus,  Numa,  and  others.  At  dawn 
the  enemy  display  the  heads  of  Nisus  and  Euryalus  to  the  Trojans  on  the  walls.  The 
grief  of  the  Trojans  and  the  lamentations  of  tbe  mother  of  Euryalus  are  described. 

458.  Phaleras  rcceptas ;  the  recovered  trapplngs ;  those  which  had  becn 

seized  by  Euryalus.     See  above,  359. 459.  Spargebat.     See  iv.  584. 

464.  Bamoribas  ;  icith  reports  ;  news  of  the  last  nighfs  bloody  work. 

471.  Maes-ti ;  gloomy  ;  because  of  the  threatened  attack,  and  the  absence-of 

Aeneas. 477.  Femineo  retains  its  final  vowel  here. 480.  Debiac;one 

syllable. 481.  Hane  te  adspicio ;  do  I  see  thee  thus?  the  fuU  expression 

would  be  hic  tu  es,  quem  adspicio  ?       ■  Tnnc  illCj  etc.  ?  couldst  thou,  that 

one,  (who  wast)  the  last  hope  of  my  old  age,  &c.  ? 485.  Date  ;  vocative, 

agreeing  with  Euryale  understood. 486.  In  tna  fanera ;  to  thy  burial. 

491.  Fanns  lacerum ;  thy  mutilatcd  corpse. Hoc ;   referring  to  the 

ghastly  head  which  she  sees  raised  by  the  Rutuli  on  the  point  of  a  spear. 

■  492.  Hoc;  /or  this;  for  such  ail  end  as 
this  ;  ablat.  But,  perhaps  better,  the  accu- 
sative,  referring,  as  in  491,  to  caput.  Heyne. 
499.  Infractae;  nerveless. 

603-568.  The  Rutulians  commence  the  assault 
on  the  camp.  Invocation  to  tho  Muses.  Many 
Trojans  perish  in  the  burning  and  fall  of  a  tower, 
and  Helenor  and  Lycus,  who  had  alone  escaped 
from  It,  are  slain. 

505.  Testndine ;  a  testudo  heing  advanced; 
a  covering  formed  with  their  shields.     See 

ii.  441. 516.  Rnnnt;   cast  down;  transi- 

tive,  as  in  i.  35,  85. 518.  Caeco  marte ; 

in  the  blind  warfare  ;  in  which,  being  under 
the  testudo,  they  can  neither  see   nor  be 

seen. 525.  Vos ;  the  plural  has  respect  to 

all  the  Muses,  though  only  Calliope  is  desig- 

nated.     Comp.  vestras,  i.  140. 528.  In- 

gentes  oras  belli ;  the  whole  ivide  feld  of  the 

war ;    tlie   war  in  all  its   aspects. 530. 

Vasto  snspecta ;   of  great  elevation.     Comp. 

iuspectus,  vi.  519. Pontibns;  footways  of 

plank  leading  from  the  towcr  back  to  the 

wall  in  front  of  which  it  stood. 542.  Ad 

terram ;  join  with  veniunt. 543.  Pectora ; 

acc.  limitiu*  transfossi. 546.  Maeonio  re-  s  ... .. — . 

gl;    to  a  Lydian  prince.—m.   Vetitis ;    1  »^AAA30nH»nolHMA] 

probably  to  be  understood  of  the  prohibition  Calliope. 

©f  the  father,  against  whose  will  Licymnia  bad  secretly  sent  Helenor  to 


566  NOTES   ON   THE    AENEID. 

Troy. 54S.  Inglorins  ;  withouf  device;  distinguished  by  no  device  on  hia 

tohite  (unadorncd)  bucklcr. 558.   Tecta ;   the  battlcmentcd  top  of  the 

wall. 564.  Jovis  arniiger.    Comp.  i.  394. 566.  Martins  Inpns;   the 

«'olf  was  sacred  to  Mars. 

569-C71.  ■Whilo  the  combat  is  raging,  Numanus,  a  young  Latin  prince,  and  brothet- 
iii-law  of  TurnuB,  approaches  the  wall  and  taunts  the  Trojans  with  cowardice.  Asca- 
nius  from  the  battlements  hears  tho  boaster,  and  greatly  inceneed,  for  the  first  time 
aims  his  arrow  at  an  encmy,  first  invokiug  the  aid  of  Jupiter.  His  arrow  flies  with 
fatal  precision  and  pierces  the  temples  of  Numanus.  But  through  apprehension  for 
the  gafety  of  Ascauius  ApoIIo  descends,  and  in  the  guise  of  an  old  man,  warns  him  to 
abstain  from  furthcr  dariug.  The  Trojans,  recognizing  the  god  as  he  vanishes,  with- 
draw  Ascanius  from  the  ramparts. 

572.    Hic,  Liger  ;    hif,  Asylas. Longe  fallente ;    slaylng  from  far ; 

more  fuUy  expressed,  hitting  from  far  its  unsHspecting  victim. 5T5.  Pro; 

in  defence  of ;  equivalcnt  here  to  in ;  standing  on  the  tops  of  the  toivcrs,  or 

on  the  iop  of  a  toioer. 580.  Spiranienta  animae;    the  passages  of  the 

breath;  the  lungs. 581.    Arcentis;    a  prince  of  eastern  Sicily. 585. 

Palici ;  Palicus,  one   of  two  brothers  who  were  worshipped  as  deitics  in 

Sicily. 586.  Positis  ;  beiiig  laid  aside. 589.  Mnlta  arena  ;  on  the  dcep 

sand  at  the  foot  of  the  ranipart,  from  wliich  he  is  supposed  to  fall.     This  is 
probably  the  sense.     Heyne,  however,  supposcd  the  floor  of  the  rampart 

itself  to  be  meant. 596.  Novo  regno  ;  with  his  new  royalty ;  or  royal  al- 

liance  by  marriage. 602.  Fandi  fictor ;  inventor  of  dissembling  speech. 

603.  Ab  stirpe  ;  by  nature ;  by  their  parent  stock. Primam  ;  at  the 

first;  as  soon  as  born. 609.  Omne — ferro ;  our  whole  life  is  sptent  wiih 

the  sword. 618.  Dindyma ;  the  plural  of  Dindymus,  a  mountaiu  in  Phry- 

gia. Biforem  cantam  ;  its  twofold,   or  double-toned  mv^ic ;  referring  to 

tlie  two  pipes,  ouc  of  a  lowcr  pitch  thau  the  other,  both  inserted  into  the 

lips  and  played  at  once,  or  both  unitcd  at  the  cnd  in  one  mouth-piece. 

619.  Baxns  ;  theboxwood;  synonymous  herc  with  <i6ia. 629.  Qni ;  sub- 

jcct  of  both  verbs. 632.  Addacta  sagitta  ;  th^;  drawn  arroic ;  the  arrow 

drawn  back  on  the  strained  bow-string.     Some  read  elapsa  for  adducta. 

613.  Gentc — resident ;  it  is  right  that  all  wars  destined  to  come,  should  tcr- 

minate  under  the  race  of  Assaracus ;  i.  e.  under  Augustus. 614.  Nec  te 

Troja  capit ;  nor  does  so  limited  a  dominioc  as  Troy  confinc  thee.     Thou 

hast  a  spirit  for  the  dominion  of  the  world. 617.  Dardanio  rctains  its 

final  vowel. 650.  — qne  loscs  its  final  vowel. 653.  Aenide  ;  this  rcad- 

inp  has  the  best  authority. 656.  Cetcra  ;  as  for  the  rest ;  accusativc;  aa 

in  iii.  594. Parce  bello;  abstain  from  the  var.     Comp.  i.  257. 661. 

Aridnm ;  ihough  cagor. 668.  IMavialibiis  liaedis ;    in  tlve  season  of  the 

rainy  Kids ;  ablative  of  timc  whcn.  The  Kids  are  two  stars  in  the  hand 
of  Auriga,  the  setting  of  which  in  Dccember  was  attcnded  with  heavy  rains 
670.  Jupiter;  the  god  who  rcgulatcs  thc  scasons  and  thc  weathcr. 

672-716.  Pandaius  and  I?iliaf>,  youthR  of  giguntic  Ktatnr(>,  eone  of  Alcftnor  «nd  fhe 


BOOK   NINTH. 


567 


mountam  nymph  lacra,  throw  open  one  of  the  gates  and  provobc  the  RutuUans  to  as- 
sail  thcm.    A  blooJy  encounter  follows,  aud  Bitias  is  slain. 

6TT.  Pro  tarribus  ;  hefore  the  towers;  in  front  of  the  towers  that  fianked 

the  ffates      So  Wagner.    But  Hevne  understands  as  or  like  toxcers. 680. 

Athesim  ;  the  Ath^sis,  now  the  Adige,  a  river  which  empties  into  the  Adnatic 

north  of  the  Po. 685.  Animi;  for  the  genitive  see  Gr.  §  213,  R.  1,  (a); 

Z  §  437,  n.  1,  at  the  end. 69T.  Thebana  ;  not  of  Thebes  in  Boeotia,  but 

of  Thebe's  in  Mysia,  the  native  place  also  of  Andromache. 698.  Cornns; 

the  shaft  of  the  spear,  made  of  cornel  wood. T05.  Phalarica;  a  heavy 

spear-like  missile,  usually  discharged  by  a  machine.  Nothing  but  such  an 
instruraent  could  have  slain  Bitias,  and  none  of  the  enemy  but  Turnus  could 

have  hurled  it. TOT.  Sqnama  et  auro  ;  hendiadys  for  aurea  squama;  the 

corselet  was  fortified  with  double  scales,  or  small  plates,  of  gold.     Join  the 

ablatives  v^\i\ifidelis,  as  ablatives  of  cause. TIO.  Baiarum  ;  Baiae  onthe 

bay  of  Naples  and  near  the  Euboic  settlement  of  Cumae.  Sce  on  vi.  2. 
The  Romans  erected  many  palatial  buildings  kt  Baiae,  the  foundations  of 
which  often  extended  iiito  the  sea.  .  The  fall  of  Bitias  is  compared  to  masscs 

of  rock  thrown  into  the  sea  for  such  foundations. T15.  Cnblle  ;  m  appo- 

sition  with  Inarime. ^T15,  T16.  Prochyta,  now  Procida,  and  Inarane,  now 

Ischia,  are  islands  near  Baiae.  Jupiter  is  here  supposed  to  have  cast  the 
island  of  Inarime  upon  the  giant  Typhoeus.     Comp.  iii.  578  sqq.,  and  note. 

717-818.  Mars  now  inBpires  the  enemy  with  fresh  courage  and  unnerves  the  Tro- 
ian  Pandarus  closes  the  gate,  and  in  doing  this  shuts  in  Turnus,  whom  he  at  once 
Tsails  incited  by  his  brother's  death.  Pandarus  is  slain,  and  Turnus  then  attack  tho 
d Tuled  T  ojans  He  is  soou  sun-ounded,  but  finally  saves  himself  by  plungmg  from 
the  battlemcuts  into  the  Tiber,  from  whence  he  hastens  to  jo.n  his  countrymen. 

718.  Stimnlos.     Comp.  vi.  101. ^T29.  Ultro;  Turnus  under  any  other 

•ircumstances  could  havc  effected  an  entrance  only  by  force  ;  but  now  he  is 
admitted  by  Pandarus  without  resistance  and  as  it  wcre  spontaneously^— - 

T36.  Emicat;  daris  forward. T48.  Is;  such;  equivalent  to  tahs.     Sucb, 

or  so  inefficient,  as  thine. T63.  Exclpit;   he  overtahes. Hine;  tl^n. 

Raptas;  seized;  taken  from  those  already  slain. T6o.  Comitem;  a 

conrpanion  i.  e.  to  the  others  whom  he  has  just  killed.— T66.  Ignaros, 
ctc  this  and  the  foUowing  hne  refer  to  Trojan  combatants  on  the  wall  who 
are  intent  on  the  confiict  outside,  and  are  ignorant  that  Turnus  is  enelosed 
within  the  walls.     Some  of  these  Turnus,  springing  upon  the  wall,  stnkes 

down  while  their  backs  are  turned  towards  him. T6T.  Noemonaque ;  the 

final  e  is  lengthened  here. T68-TT0.  Lyncea-oecupat ;  while  Turnus  on 

the  embankment  behind  the  battlements  was  slaying  t^ose  inentioned  m 
verse767,Lynceusthought  to  advance  upon  him  from  behmd  and  take 
him  at  a  disadvantage.  But  Turnus  from  the  embankment,  .^uth  a  skdM 
(dexter-)  blow  of  his  sword  anticipates  {occupat)  the  attack,  and  severs  the 
htad  0  Lynccus  from  his  body.— TT6.  Nnmeros  intendere  nervis  ;  a  poet- 
ictransposttion  for  ad  nmneros  intendere  ner.os ;    to  tune  the  stnngs  tc 


568 


NOTES   ON    THE    AENEID. 


nuinbers. 781.  Deinde  ;  still,  farther. 787.  Segnes  ;  ye  cowards  ;  slcc. 

agrceing  with  vos. 794.   Acerba ;   adverbially.     See  on  j.  465. 803. 

Sofficere;  to  afford,  or  supply ;  as  ii.  618. 804.  Gcrmanae^  Juno.     See 

i.  47,  and  xii.  830. 806.  Sabsistere  ;  to  withstand. Tantani ;  so  much; 

so  much  as  would  be  necessary  to  maintaiu  the  fight.     Comp.  v.  21. 
813,814.  Piceam  flnmen  agit;  urffes  along  a  pitchy  stream;    the   sweat 
brcaking  out  from  his  face  and  body  flows  mingled  with  blood  and  dust, 
and  looks  black  like  pitch. 816.  Ilie  refers  tojiuvius;  the  Tiber. 


Head  of  Medusk 


BOOK   TENTH. 


569 


Jupiter  and  the  Olympian  goda. 


BOOK  X. 

Coimcil  of  tlie  gods.     Pallas,  Lausiis,  Mezentius. 

1-117.  Jupiter  calls  the  gods  to  a  council  in  Olympup,  and  persuadea  them  to  put  an 
end  to  diecord.  Venus  complains  of  the  hard  persecution  of  the  Trojans,  and  Juno 
bitterly  replies.  Jupiter  declares  at  last  that  the  fates  shall  decide  the  conflict  without 
dny  interfereuce  of  the  gods. 

1.  Panditnr.     Olympus  was  opencd  in  thc  morning  and  closed  in  the 

evening.     Comp.  i.  374. 5.  Bipatentibns  ;   with  two-valved  doors. 7. 

Vcrsa  retro ;  turned  back  again  to  thc  same  bitter  hostility  as  in  former 

times  durmg  the  Trojan  war. 13.  Alpes  immittet  apertas ;  will  send  th^ 

opencd  Alps ;  a  bold  expression  {ov  hostes  pcr  Alpes  apertas  immittet ;  re- 
ferring  to  the  invasion  of  Hannibal.     The  hinguage  is  analogous  to  that  of 

Tacitus,  Agr.  18,  mare  expectahant,  for  hostes  per  mare  expectahant. 24» 

Aggeribns  mnrornni.     Comp.  ix.  '769.    For  murorum  some  editions  adopt 
the  oldcr  form  moerorum. 28t  Arpisj  ■A.rpi,  or  Argyripa,  the  city  of 


570  NOTES    ON    THE   AENEID. 

Dioined  in  Apulia,  called  Aetolian  bccause  Diomed  was  of  Aetolian  descenU 

29.  Vulnera.     Diomcd  had  inflicted  a  wound  on  tbe  hand  of  Venus  ia 

hattle  at  the  siege  of  Troy.     The  occasion  was  the  same  as  the  one  alluded 

to  in  i.  94  sqq. 42.  Sapcr  impcrio ;  concerning  the  supreme  dominion; 

namely,  that  proraised  to  the  Trojans  in  i.  257.     For  the  usage  of  super, 

Bee  on  i.  680. 51.  Amathns  and  Paphns  were  cities  of  Cyprus. CytUc- 

ra.    See  on  i.  257. 52.  Idaliae.     See  on  i.  681,  693. 53.  Dic  ;  domi 

tneae. 54.  Premat ;  supply  w<;  the  infinitive  is  the  regular  construction 

ti^ter  Jubcre. Inde ;    frmn  that  quarter ;    i.   e.  from  Ascanius  and  his 

posterity. TO.  Snmmam  belli ;  the  direction  of  the  zcar. 71.  Tyrrhe- 

nam — qnictas  ;  to  stir  up  an  Etrurian  lcague  or  peaceful  tribes.     To  cicite 

the  peaccful  Tyrrhenians  to  a  warlike  aUiance. Fidem  ;  a  league  or  alli- 

ancc. T2.  Frandem  ;  mischance. 13.  Hic  ;   here  ;  on  this  present  oc« 

casion  of  difficulty,  where  is  the  agency  of  Juno  or  Iris? T7.  Qnid;  Khat 

(is  it)  ?  is  it  not  shameful  for  the  Trojans  to  commit  violence,  to  oppress, 

&c.  ? 79.  Soceros,  pactas  ;  referring  to  Latinus  and-  Lavinia. 83.     It 

was  by  Cybele  that  the  ships  were  actually  transformed ;  but  every  favor  to 

the  Trojans,  by  whomsoever  efifected,  is  ascribed  by  Juno  to  Venus. 90. 

The  infinitive  is  a  very  irregular  construction  after  qicae  causa  fnit.     The 

prose  would  bo  guae  causa  fuit  Europae  Asiacque  consurgendif 96. 

Orabat;    spoke.     Comp.  vii.  446. 98.    Caeca;    low,   indistinct. 102. 

Tremefacta  solo  ;  shaken  or  trembling  in  its  dcpths. 103.  Posnere  ;  sup- 

ply  se ;  have  calmed  themselves,  have  sunk  to  rest. Placida  is  proleptic. 

107.  Secat;  forms. 108.  Fnat;   an  archaic  fqrm  for  sit. 111. 

Sna  exorsa ;  his  own  beginnings,  his  oion  enterprises  shall  bring  to  each,  &c. 
113-115.     Comp.  ix.  104-106. 

118-145.  The  Trojans,  few  in  numbcr,  aro  distributed  along  the  ramparts,  and 
though  dejected,  resolutely  malntain  the  defence,  under  tho  directiou  of  Mnestheus 
and  other  lcaders. 

118.  Circnm;  adverbially;  rQund  about. 122.  Corona ;  the  circle  of 

dcfenders ;  the  soldiery  stationed  along  the  walls. 126.  Alta  ;  for  clara  ; 

renowned. 133.  Capnt ;   Greek  acc.  limiting  detectus. 136.  Buxo  re- 

tains  the  final  o. Oricia ;  from  Oricus  or  Orieutn,  a  city  in  Epirus. 

142.  Pactolos  ;  a  river  of  Lydia,  the  sands  of  which  were  said  to  bc  mingled 

with  gold. 145.  Campanac  nrbi ;  Capua.     The  derivation  of  thc  name 

from  Capys  is,  of  course,  fanciful.     Both  Campania  and  Capua  have  the 
same  root  as  campus, 

146-214.  Aeneas  forms  an  alliance  with  tho  Etruri.ine,  who  immeJiately  sct  out 
with  him  in  their  ships,  to  carry  succor  to  hla  belenguercd  camp.  Tlie  poct  cnume- 
rates  tho  ships  ••ind  tho  forccs  on  board,  and  nientions  tho  leaders  of  tho  Etrurians. 
Thero  are  thirty  ships,  and  tho  troops  are  arrangcd  undcr  four  lcadcre,  Massicus, 
Abas,  AsilaB,  and  Astur. 

149.  Rcgi ;  Tarchon,  the  Etrurian  commandcr.     Sce  viii.  603. 154. 

Libcra  fati ;  frcc  in  respcct  to  fate  ;  unhindcred  by  fate;  no  longcr  Iicld  bj 


BOOK   TENTH. 


571 


the  prohibition  of  the  fates,  mentioned  in  viii.  602  sqq.     For  the  genitive 

see  Gr.  §  213,  R.  5,  (4);  Z.  §  43Y. 155.  Lydia.     See  on  ii.  T81. 156. 

Dnci  retains  the  final  i. 157.  Sabjuncta    leones  ;  joincd  as  to  lions  under 

thebeak;  fov  kabens  suhjunctos  leones.      Comp.  iii.  428. 158.  Ida ;  per- 

haps  a  personification  of  Mount  Ida,  or  perhaps  Cybele  tlie  tutelar  goddess 
of  Ida  is  meant.     The  latter  interpretation  would  suggest  that  the  ornament 

on  the  prow  of  the  ship  -svas  Cybele  drawn  in  her  chariot  by  lions. 159. 

Hic;  here,  ovinthis  ship,— — 169.  Goryti;  also  spclled  coryti;  bow  cases. 


Etruscan  warriors. 

ITl.  Cbalybnm ;  of  the  Chalybes.    See  on  viii.  421. 180.  Solo ;  in 

respect  to  soil,  ov  territory;  contrasted  wLth  ab  origine.  188.  Crimen 
amor  vestrum ;  your  fault  was  love ;  to  whom  vestrum  refers  is  doubtful. 
Perhaps  the  words  are  interpolatcd.     They  may  refer  to  Cycnus  and  his 

sisters,  and  their  love  for  Phaethon. ^Formaeqne  insigne  patcrnae  ;  and  a 

crest  rnade  in  his  father' s  fonn  ;  explanatory  of  olorinae  pen?iae.  The  orna- 
ment  on  the  helmet  of  Cupavo  was  the  plumage  of  a  swan,  worn  to  coiu- 

memorate  the  transformation  of  his  fathcr,  Cycnus,  into  a  swan. 196. 

Saxnm — minator;  thrcate^is  {to  hurl)  a  huge  rock  into  the  waves ;  the  cen- 
taurs  were  sometimes  sculptured  in  thc  act  of  hurling  rocks,  as  if  in  battle. 

202.  Triplcx  ;  Virgil  assigns  to  his  native  city  a  threefold  origin ;  Etrus- 

can,  Greek,  and,  pcrhaps,  Umbrian ;  while  each  of  these  three  elements  is 
represented  in  four  towns,  {qjiaterni  populi,)  making  twelve  in  all,  subject  to 


572  NOTES   ON   THE   AENEID. 

Mantua.     The  strongcst  element,  however,  vires,  is  Tuscan. 204.  In  se; 

Mezentius,  by  his  cruelty,  has  excited  the  Tuscans  to  revolt  against  him. 

206.  Mincins ;  the  river  god,  Mincius,  is  the  figure-head  of  the  ship. 

207.  Gravis ;  the  term  is  transferrcd  from  the  ship  to  its  commander. 

Comp.  V.  270,  271. Centena  arbore ;  for  centum  remis. 

215-286.  "While  Acneas  is  pnrBuing  Lis  voyage  in  the  moonlight,  the  njTnplis  Into 
which  the  Trcjan  ships  have  been  transformed  appear  to  him  on  the  water,  and  one  of 
them,  Cymodoce,  informs  him  of  tho  aBsault  on  his  camp,  and  of  the  danger  of  his 
conntrymen.'  He  prays  to  Cybele,  and  directs  his  followers  to  be  instantly  ready  for 
battle.  On  his  approach  to  the  camp,  tho  Trojans  on  tho  r.amparts  raise  a  shout,  and 
eng.ige  in  the  defence  with  etill  more  vigor,  whilc  Turnus,  nothing  daunted,  prepares 
to  resist  the  new  comers  at  their  landing. 

215,  216.  Currn  Phoebc  pnlsabat  Olympnm.    See  on  iii,  512,  v.  721. 

220.  Cybebe ;  another  form  for  Cybele,  from  the  Greek  Ku^tj^Sjj. 221. 

Nnmcn  haberc  maris  ;  to  have  the  divinity  of  the  sea;  to  possess  the  divine 

character  or  attributes  pertaining  to  sea-goddesses. 234.  Ilanc  faciem 

refccit ;  has  reproduced  this  forin  ;  has  reproduced  us,  but  in  this  new  form. 

238»  Jam  loca  jnssa,  etc.    We  must  understand  that  the  Etrurian  caval- 

ry  have  been  directed  by  Aeneas  to  join  the  Arcadian  cavalry  of  Pallanteum, 
and  to  proceed  with  them  down  the  bank  of  the  Tiber  to  some  point  ap- 
pointed  by  him  {loca  jussa)  near  the  place  of  his  expected  disembarkation. 
We  learn  from  362,  363,  below,  that  this  spot  was  at  the  junction  of  some 
Bmall  stream  with  the  Tiber.     Turnus  will  of  course  aim  to  prevent  the  ar- 

rival  of  the  allied  forces  at  the  Trojan  camp. 239.  Mcdias  opponcrc  tnr- 

mas  ;  to  interpose  7iis  squadrons;  i.  e.  between  them  and  the  camp. 253. 

Adfrcna;  supply  jMwc^i. 254,355.  Propinqnes  angnrinm ;  hringnearthe 

oinen,  or  the  pro7nised  event.—265>  Strymoniac  ;  from  Strymon,  a  river  in 

Thrace. 2T0.  Capiti ;  supply  Aeneae. 214.   Ille  ;   expressed  for  6m- 

phasis,  in  apposition  with  ardor.    See  on  i.  S. 2T7.  Praecipere  ;  for  occu- 

pare  ;  to  anticipate  them  in  getting  possession  of  the  shore. 279.  Per- 

fringere ;    to   break   through   (jtheir  ranhs.) ^281.    Befefto ;    reproditce ; 

iniitate. 283.  Vcstigia  ;  acc.  limiting  labant. 

287-361.  The  ships  como  to  land  in  safety,  excopting  that  of  Tarchon,  which  Is 
forced  upon  a  reef  and  broken  to  picccs.  Aencas  and  his  allics  on  landing  are  inslant- 
ly  cngaged  in  the  conflict. 

288,  289.  Scrvare — pclagi;  to  icatch  the  retreat  of  thc  chhing  sea  ;  so  as 

to  spring  upon  the  beach  when  the  wave  had  retired. 290.  Per  remos; 

others  spring  to  the  land  by  means  of  oars  which  they  plant  with  one  cnd  in 
the  sand,  and  seize  near  the  uppcr  cnd,  so  as  to  swing  themselves  over  tlio  in- 

terveuing  space  betwccu  fhe  ship  and  the  shore. 291.  Spiraut ;  hcave,  or 

hoil. 292.  InolTcnsnni ;  unresistcd;  i.  e.  by  any  bold,  rocky  bank.     Tar- 

chon  seeks  a  poiut  where  the  wave  rolls  up  steadily  increasing  {cresceiiti 
acstu)  to  thc  bcach,  iritcnding  to  take  advautage  of  this  movcmcnt  to  push 

bis  ships  far  on  the  land. 295.  ToUite  ;  lift  your  ships;  i.  e.  by  a  powcr- 

ful  etroke  of  the  oars. 304.  Fluctns  fdtigat ;  this  refera  to  th&  swinging 


BOOK    TENTH.  673 

to  and  fro  of  the  two  ends  of  the  ship  on  the  waves  before  it  goes  to  pieces. 
The  inipulse  given  by  the  oars,  aided  by  the  movement  of  the  water,  had 
drivcn  it  partially  across  the  bank  (dorsum),  so  that  both  the  forward  and 
hinder  part  are  throwu  one  way  and  another  by  the  action  of  the  waves,  for 
a  few  moments,  and  then  the  hull,  in  consequence  of  the  prcssure  and  strain 

at  the  extremities,  breaks  in  the  midst  and  goes  to  pieces. 319.  Hercnlis 

arma ;  that  is,  the  clava. 325.  Nova  gacdia ;  the  newest  love  ;  in  apposi- 

tion  with  Clytium. 334.  Steternnt ;  the  penult  here  is  short. 345. 

Cnribns ;  from  Cures. 350.  Boreae  de  gente  snprema ;  ofthe  most  ancient 

race  of  Boixas. 

362-438.  Pallap,  the  son  of  Evander,  seea  the  Arcadian  cavalry  turning  their  backs, 
and  hastens  to  rally  them  to  the  fight.  He  sets  them  the  example  of  heroism,  -while 
on  the  other  side  Lausus,  the  son  of  Mczentius,  slays  several  of  the  Arcadians,  Etrus- 
cans,  and  Trojans. 

362»  Parte  ex  alia ;  that  part  of  the  field  where  Aeneas  had  directed  the 
Arcadian  and  Etrusean  cavalry  to  await  his  landing.  See  above,  238.  It 
seems  to  have  been  on  the  banks  of  a  dry  torrent,  too  rocky  and  broken 
for  cavalry.  Pallas  has  left  Aeneas  on  landing  and  hastened  to  take  com- 
mand  of  his  own  portion  of  the  cavalry,  which  has  been  obliged  to  dismount 
on  account  of  the  nature  of  the  ground,  and  thus  to  fight  on  foot,  acies  in-- 

ferre  pedestres. 366.  Quis  ;   here  translated   as  iis,  them. Qnando, 

since,  connects  this  clause  to  the  foregoing  dare  terga.  Qms  alone  would 
have  sufiiced  to  indicate  the  causal  relation,  but  quando  is  added  for  greater 

distinctness,  though  the  construction  is  anomalous. 378.  Deest ;  here  a 

monosyllable. 382.  Trojam;   the  camp  of  the  Trojans. 383.   Dabat 

lengthens  the  final  syllable. 384.  Qaem ;  Pallas. Non  snper  occnpat 

Uisbo  ;  does  not  surprise  him  while  thus  engaged.     Ladewig  writes  superoc' 

cupat. 385.  IUe  ;  Hisbo.     See  on  ille,  i.  3. 394.  Capnt  lengthens  the 

fiual  syllable. 396.  Scmianimes ;   sem-yan-i-mes. 399.   Praeter ;  join 

Mith  fugientem  ;  flying  along  by  him. 405.  Optato  ;  accm-ding  to  his  wish. 

412.  Se — arma;  he  completely  covers  himself  with  his  shield. 426. 

Perterrita  ;  for  perterreri. — —432.  Extrcmi — acies ;  those  on  the  outside 
or  in  the  rear  of  the  others  make  the  ranks  dcnse  by  crowding  forward 
into  the  fight. 

439-609.  Turnus,  warnedby  his  sister,  Juturna,hastensto  the  aid  of  Lausus  and  the 
Latins.     Ile  flghts  with  Pallas,  who  is  slain,  and  horne  from  the  field  by  his  friends.    • 

439.  Soror ;  the  Nymph  Juturna,  sister  of  Turnus.     See  xii.  138  sqq. 

444.  Aeqnore  JUSSO  ;  from  the  required  ground ;  from  the  ground  which 

be  had  commanded  them  to  leave.     The  common  construction  would  have 

b&anjussi. 448.  Tyranni;  of  the  pnnce  ;  Turnus.     Comp.  vii.  266. 

449.  Spoliis  opimis.     See  on  vi.  855. 458.  Ire  ;  historical  infinitive. 

463.  Yictorem  ferant ;  may  the  dying  cyes  of  Turnus  support,  or  be  com- 

pelled  to  endure  the  sight  of  me  victorious  over  him. 466.  Genitor ;  Ju- 

piter. Natnm ;  Hercules. 476,  477.  Snmma  tegmina ;  the  top  of  the 

cwering  ;  Forbiger  understands  by  ihis  the  upper  part  of  the  corslet,  wkero 


574  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

it  covers  the  shoulder,  here  the  left  shoulder.  The  spear  having  already 
made  its  way  {viam  molita)  through  the  bordcr  of  the  shield,  grazed  (strinxit) 
the  body  of  Turnus,  but  inflicted  no  scrious  'wound  because  of  the  obstruc« 
tion  aflforded  both  by  the  shield  aud  corsclet  in  wliich  it  had  spent  thc 

greater  part  of  ils  force. i1%,  De  corpore  is  for  aliquid  de  corpore,  apart 

o/  the  lody. 486.  Ille ;  Pallas. 492.  Mernit ;  the  subject,  according 

to  Ileyne,  followed  by  Gossrau,  Forbiger,  and  others,  is  ille,  referring  to 
Pallas ;  /  send  hack  Pallas  to  thee  such  as  he  has  deservcd  to  be  (dcad)  by  en- 

gaging  in  .this  war  and  venturing  to  combat  with  me. 496.    Baltei} 

dissyllable. 497»  Impressnill  nefas;  the  impious  deed  wrought  upon  it ; 

that  is,  the  murder  of  the  husbauds  of  the  Danaides.     See  Class.  Dict. 

510-G05.  Aeucas  in  anothcr  part  of  the  field  heara  of  tlio  deatli  of  Pallas,  and  furi- 
ously  Beeks  Turnus,  cutting  bis  way  fhrough  tho  enemy,  and  slaying  many  of  tho 
bravest.  Ascanius  at  the  samo  time  leads  forth  the  Trojan  youth  from  within  the 
camp. 

519.  Qaos  iiniuolet;  that  he  may  slay  them.  See  xi.  81  sqq.  It  was  the 
custom  of  ancient  heroes  to  sacrifice  captives  at  the  tombs  or  on  the  funeral 
piles  of  their  friends  killed  in  battle ;  thus  Achilles  does  at  the  funeral  pyre 

of  Patroclus.     II.  xxi.  26-28.     See  also  on  iii.  821-323. 541.  Ingenti 

nmbra  tegit ;  covers  him  with  the  vast  shadoio  of  death.  This  is  Wagner's 
interpretation.      Some  prcfei  Heyne's,  which  refers  mnhra  to  the  broad 

shadow  cast  by  Aeneas  and  his  large  shield  over  the  body  of  his  victim. 

542.  Lecta ;   gathered;    taken  from  the  body  by  Aeneas. Gradive ;  au 

epithet  of  Mars. Tropaenm.     See  wood-cut  at  the  head  of  Notes  ou  the 

elevcnth  book. 545.  Dardaaides  ;   Aeneas. 552.    Ille;    Aeneas. — r- 

553.  Loricam — impedit ;  Jahn  understands  by  this  that  Aeneas,  by  thrnst- 
ing  his  spear  into  the  shield  and  corselet  of  Tarquitus,  holds  these  so  fixed 

that  he  cannot  protect  his  throat  from  the  blow  of  the  sword. 556.  Sn- 

per;  moreover. 558.  Patrioque — sepolcro;  nor  shall  cover  thy  limbs  with 

a  septdchre  of  thy  native  land,;  literally,  with  the  ancestral  sepulchre. 

564.  Amyclls;  Amyclae ;  a  town  west  of  Caicta,  not  existing  in  the  time  of 

Virgil. 565.    Aegaeon  ;    othcrwise   called  Briareus. 581.    Diomedis. 

See  i.  97,  and  notc. 586.  Telo ;  with  his  weapon ;    Lucagus  bends  for- 

ward  to  strike  and  spur  the  horscs  with  the  point  of  his  sword,  while  prc- 
pariug  to  meet  Acneas. 

C06-688.  Jupiter  Buffers  Juno  to  dcl.ay  the  death  of  Turnus,  and  sho  rebcucs  him 
from  tho  ficld  by  sending  a  phantom  in  tho  forra  of  Acncas,  whicli  Turuus  pursuea 
until  it  leads  him  iuto  a  ship.  This  immcdiately  convcys  liim  away.  In  despair  lie  ia 
borne  to  Ardea. 

610.  Kon — viris ;  said  ironically. 613.  Si — forct ;  with  our  reading  tho 

apodosis  must  be  supplicd,  oion  hic  rerum  statits  csset ;  or  clse  si  must  bo 
taken  in  the  optative  sensc,  "  0  that."     Othcrs  prcfer  by  changing  the 

punctuation  to  make  the  following  clause,  noji,  ctc,  the  apodosis. 623. 

BIc — scntis;  andifit  is  your  undcrstandivg  that  I  thus  aWangc  this.  If  tliis, 
and  this  only,  tho  postponemcut  of  his  dcatb,  is  thc  thought  you  eutertain, 


BOOK   TENTH.  575 

with  no  ulterior  and  secret  purpose — you  can  be  indulged. 628.  Qaid°; 

elliptical ;  what  mattcr  would  it  be?  or  what  would  hinder  ?  After  graTariS 
supply  dare.     This  is  said  by  Juno  in  a  rcsio^ncd  and  winning  manner,  half 

hoping,  half  fearing. 649.  Tlialamos ;  an  allusion  to  the  proposed  mar- 

riage  of  Aeneas  and  Lavinia. 652.  Gandia ;  his  jo}iful  hope.     He  does 

not  see  that  his  hope  is  vain,  that  tlie  air  bears  it  away. 655.  Clnsinis; 

the  ship  was  one  of  those  commanded  by  Massicus,  (see  above,  166,)  and 

under  the  immediate  command  of  the  prince,  Osiuius. 663.  IllQin ;  Tur- 

nus. 669.  Expendere;  supply?«e. 672.  Qnid;  object  of /aae<  under- 

stood. 681,  682.  Sese  mncrone  indnat ;  a  bolder  form  for  se  mucrotii,  or 

in  mucronem  induat ;  he  should  pierce  himself  throurjh  and  through  wifh  the 
sword;  that  he  should,  as  it  were,  clothe  or  cover  the  blade  with  his  body. 

689-754.  The  deed3  of  Mczentius,  and  of  some  otlier  heroes  lcss  distinguished. 

689.  JOTis  monitis ;  by  the  impulse  of  Jupiter. 698,  699.  Latagnm  os 

faciemqne ;  he  strikes  Latagus  on  the  7nouth  andface;  the  Greek  construc- 
tion,  in  which  the  accusative  of  the  whole  object  is  accompanied  by  an  ac- 

cusative  of  the  particular  part  affected. 700.  Scgnem  ;  inactive  ;  helpless. 

704.  Face.     See  on  vii.  320. 706.  Ignarnm;   here  used  passively; 

unknown ;  a  stranger. 707.  Ille  calls  special  attention  beforehand  to  the 

subject,  aper. 708.  Vesalns;  now  Monte  Viso,  a  raountain  of  the  Alpine 

chain  on  the  confines  of  Liguria,  from  which  rises  the  Po. 716.  Qnibns 

irae  ;  both  in  the  dative.     See  Gr.  §  22T. 720.  Grains ;  so  called  under 

the  prevaihng  belief  that  Cortona  or  Corythus  was  founded  by  the  Pelasgi. 

725.  Snrgentem  iucornna;  ior  surgentem  comibus ;  toicering  with  his 

horns. 731.  Infracta;  broken;  i.  e.  broken  in  the  wouud. 732.  Fngi- 

entem ;  from  behind;  Orodes  is  not  running  away  from  Mezentius,  but  pur- 
suing  some  of  the  Rutuhans,  and  pushing  forward  in  a  direction  which  left 
Mezentius  in  his  rear.    The  latter  scorns  to  attack  Orodes  at  a  disadvantage. 

733.  Caccnm;  unseen;  if  it  should  be  inflicted  from  behind. 754. 

Fallcnte.    See  on  ix.  572. 

755-832.  Whlle  the  gods  wdtness  the  still  equal  conflict,  Mezentius  at  length  is  met 
by  Aeneas  and  wouuded,  but  effects  a  retreat  through  the  interferenco  of  Lausus,  hia 
brave  son.  Lausus,  in  vain  urged  hy  Acneas  to  desist  from  the  combat,  is  finally  slain 
by  the  hero,  who  deplores  his  fate. 

764,  765.  Maxima  stagna;  the  vast  depths.     See  on  i.  126. 766,  767. 

Ant  {quum)  ingreditnr,  etc. ;  or  when  he  hoth  walks  on  fhe  ground,  &c. 

774,  775.  /  consecrate  thee  thyself,  Lausus,  as  a  trophy,  covered  with  tht 
spoils  torn  from  the  body  of  the  robber  Aeneas.  Lausus  was  thus  to  be  as  a 
living  trophy.  A  trophy,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word,  was  the  trunk 
of  a  tree  erected  and  covered  with  the  arms  of  the  slain.     See  xi.  5  sqq., 

and  wood-cut. 781.  Alieno  ;   here,  infended  for  another. 786.  Vircs 

hand  pcrtnlit ;  it  (the  spear)  did  not  convey  its  force  ;  its  force  was  spent  in 

passing  through  the  various  and  firmly  wrought  materials  of  the  shield. 

794.  Ille ;  Meznutius Inntilis ;  helplcss. Inqne  ligatns ;  by  tmcsis  for 


576 


NOTES   ON    THE   AENEID. 


illigatusque ;  and fastencd ;  i.  c.  to  thc  spear,  Trhich  has  penetratod  his  loin. 

799.  Snstinait;  borc  np  a(/ai nst  (Acnca.s)  himself. 81  !•  Majoraqne) 

etc. ;  supply  guid;  and  why  do  you  dare  thinfjs  greatcr  than  your  strength? 

832-908.  Mezcntius  meanwhile  liaving  retreated  to  tlic  bank  of  tbo  rivcr,  eoon  heara 
tho  tidiiigs  of  )ii8  eon'8  death.  No  longer  able  to  figbt  on  foot,  he  returns  to  the  field 
mountcd  on  his  liorse,  and  again  encountering  Aeneas,  he  is  slain. 

838.  Colla  fOTCt ;  rests  his  ncck. Barbam  ;  Grcek  acc.  liiniting  fusus. 

- — 842.  Ingcuti  vnlncre  Tictnm  ;  laid  low  ly  a  mighty  wound. 854.  Om- 

ncs  pcr  mortcs,  etc. ;  (would)  that  I had  given  vp  my  guilty  life  hy  every  fo)in 
cf  death ;  to  death  by  cvery  form  of  suftering.     For  the  optativc  use  of  the 

pluperfect,  comp.  iv.  G^S. 869.  Capnt;  Greek  acc. 8T5.  So  may  that 

father  of  the  gods,  so  great  Apollo  do  ;  may  they  eftect  that  wc,  according 

to  thy  desirc,  may  now  join  in  combat. 880.  Horremns ;  plural  for  the 

singular. Ncc — nlli ;  7ior  do  Iregard  any  of  the  gods ;  so  as  through  fear 

of  them  to  abstain  from  this  contcst. 884.  Ingenti  gjTO  ;  he  ridcs  round 

and  round  Aeneas  with  the  utmost  speed,  and  at  the  distance  of  a  javelin- 

fihot. 887.  Silvam  ;  the  forest  of  darts  adhering  to  the  front  of  his  shield. 

889.  Iniqoa ;  Aeneas  fought  on  foot. 892.  Calcibns ;   best  under- 

stood  here  of  the  forc  fcet. 893.   Snpcr ;   preposition  here  governing 

equitcm. 894.  Ejcctoarmo;  uith  his  lcg  throicn  out,  or  streVchcd  forth. 

This  interpretatiou  is  prefei-red  by  thc  best  commentators  to  that  which 
joins  ejecto  with  equiti  understood.  Ladewig  translates  ejccto,  dislocated. 
The  passage,  892-894,  may  be  thus  rendered:  "The  horsc  throws  himself 
upward,  and  paws  the  air  with  his  hoofs,  and,  casting  off  his  rider,  falls  him- 
eelf  upon  him,  binding  him  to  thc  ground,  and,  prostrate,  resting  upon  him 
with  his  cxtended  shoulder." 897.  Snper;  advcrb;  moreover ;  asin556. 


NcmoBii 


BOOK  ELEVENTH. 


577 


Tropaeum. 


BOOK  XI. 

Funeral  honors  to  tlie  dead,  tlie  truce,  renewal  of  lios- 
tilities,  and  deatli  of  Camilla. 

1-99.  Aoneaa  erects  a  trophy  ■with  the  arms  of  ilezentius,  and  directs  his  foHowers 
to  be  ready  at  any  moment  to  march  against  Laurentum.  Ho  then  dismisses  Acoetes. 
the  aged  attendant  of  Pallas,  with  the  body  of  his  slaia  master,  and  selects  a  thousand 
men  to  escort  it  to  the  home  of  Evander. 

1.  Intereai    Comp.  x.  1. 3<  Praecipitant  cnrac;  cai-es  urge  him.- 

Fimere ;  the  reference  is  to  the  funeral  rites  of  his  fallen  companions,  and 

especially  to  those  of  Pallas. 4.  Solvebat ;   for  the  combination  of  tlie 

perfect  ancl  imperfect  tenses  in  the  same  sentence,  comp.  ii.  1. 9.  Tela 

trirnca ;  the  broken  weapons  ;    of  Mezentius. 15.  Qnod  superest ;   as  to 

what  remains  ;  as  to  the  remainder  of  the  war,    Comp.  ix.  157. 16.  Ma- 

nibos — est;  this,  even  such  as  this,  is  Mezentius  ly  my  deed ;  by  my  hands 

nothing  of  the  proud  Mezentius  has  been  left  but  this  trophy  here. 20f 

Adaaerint  snp.  ;  when  first  the  gods  shall  have  directed.     As  soon  as  the 
auspices  shall  have  sanctioned  a  renewal  of  the  conflict.     For  the  usage  of 

the  tenses  here,  see  Z.  496,  5. 23«  Snb  Acheronte ;  in  Hades. 30i 

Positam.    Comp.  ii.  644,  and  note. 31.  Parrhasio.    Corap.  viii.  S44. 

33.  Comcs  datns  ibat ;  had  been  assigned  as  companion.     Comp.  ii.  704,  vi. 

159,  viii.  46G,  et  al.     Ihat  is  a  lively  substitute  for  erat  in  this  phrase. • 

Alamno;  for  filio. 41.  Neqae;  for  neve.     See  Gr.  §  262,  R.  7,  n.  4;  Z. 

§  535. 47.  Imperinm ;  Heyne  understands  the  promised  couquest  and 

dominion  of  Latium ;  Pecrlkamp  merely  the  command  of  tlie  Tjrrheniau 
25 


578  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

nrmy,  which  Evander  had  dircctcd  Acneas  to  f-eck.     See  viii.  496. 18, 

Com — gcnte ;  that  hattles  {\vcre  to  bc)  wilh  a  hardy  race  ;  for  the  Asyndeton, 

see  Gr.  §  323,  1,  (1). 51,  52.  Kil  debentcm ;  the  son  is  now  released  by 

death  frora  fulfilling  any  vows  which  Evandcr  may  be  making  to  the  gods 

for  hini. 56,  57.  Ncc — pater;  in  case  the  son  had  becn  savcd  by  cow- 

ardly  fliglit,  the  fathcr  would  have  dcsircd  for  himself  miserable  death; 

deatli  acconipaniod  with  curses  on  such  a  son. 64.  BloUe ;  soft ;  because 

mado  of  pHant  boughs.     In  cratcs  et  ferretrnm  we  have  an  examplo  of  the 

hendiadys ;  the  bier  consistcd  of  hurdle-work. 73.  Lacta  labcrnm  ;  this 

construction  appears  in  a  fragnient  of  Sallust:  frucjumque  ■palulique  lactus 

ager,   and  frequently   iu  hiter   writers.     Ladewig. 78.    Lanrentis ;    re- 

ferring  to  tlie  battle  with  the  Latins  or  Laurentines  on  the  previous  day. 

81.  Manas  qnos;  for  manus  crorum  juvenum  quos.     See  x.  518-520, 

and  note. 81.  Dnces;   the  leaders  of  the  thousand  men.     He  orders 

these  to  bear  branches  of  trees  covercd  witli  the  arms  of  enemies  slain  by 

Pallas,  and  severally  marked  with  the  names  of  the  slain. 90.  Lacrimans ; 

Homer,  in  the  seventeenth  book  of  the  lUad,  rcpreseuts  tlie  horses  of  Acliil- 

les  as  weeping. 86.  Alias  ad  lacrimas ;  tlie  burial  ritcs  of  other  fricuds 

must  be  performed. 97,  98.  Aeternnm  ;  for  in  aeternum. 

100-181.  Envoj'8  arrive  from  Laurentum  to  beg  the  privilege  of  prxying  tho  last 
bonors  to  their  dead.  Aenc.as  receives  them  kindly,  aud  grants  a  truce  for  twelvo 
days,  both  for  the  funeral  rites,  ,ind  for  bringing  about  a  peace.  lu  the  mc.inwhile  tlie 
body  of  Tallas  is  convoyed  to  Pallanteum,  and  recoived  by  Evander,  who  dismiBses 
the  messengers  of  Acneas  with  a  prayer  for  vengeanco  upon  Turnus. 

100.  Aderant;  they  were  already  present  whcn  Aeneas  returned  to  tlic 

camp. 103.  Rcdderet ;  ut  omitted,"  as  in  i,  645  and  ii.  75,  et  aL 104. 

Nnllnm  certamcn;  supply  esse  depeuding  on  dicentes  understood.     On  the 
transition  from  the  subjunctive  to  the  infinitive  in  the  oratio  ohliqua,  see 

Gr.  §  273,  3,  (b);  Z.  §  620. Acthcre  cassis.     See  on  ii.  85. 109.  Qnl 

fngiatis.     See  Gr.  §  264,  1 ;  Z,  §  556. 112.  Veni;  the  perfoct  indicative, 

instead  of  tlie  ordinary  form  of  the  apodosis,  expresses  the  conclusion  as  an 

absohitc  certainty. 115.  Acqnlns  fnerat.     See  Gr.  §  259,  R.  3,  (a);  Z. 

§  518. 118.  Vixct;  for  vixisset.     See  Gr.  §  162,  9;  Z.  §  160,  2. «25. 

Coclo;    dativc. Landibas;    ablative. 126.    Jnstitiae,    labornm;    the 

gcnitive  after  mircr  m  iniitatioii  of  the  Greek  idiom.     Comp.  73,  and  410. 

130.  Fatales  moles ;  thc  dcstincd  matcrials  or  structures;  those  which 

arc  to  form  thc  city  pointcd  out  by  fatc,     It  wiil  delight  us  to  aid  in  build- 
iiig  tho  ncw  Troy  evcn  with  our  own  hands.     It  is  understood  that  a  pcr- 

manent  city  is  to  be  built  on  the  site  of  thc  prcscnt  camp, 141.  Lallo  ; 

ablative;  in  Latium.    Peerlliamp  would  rcad  late. 143.  LncctTla;  tho 

escort  must  have  arrived  -^vith  the  body  of  Pallas  in  the  evcning.     Torchos 
wcre  Bometimcs  borne  before  thc  funeral  processions  in  Rome,  and  this  cus- 

tom  Virgil  hcre  ascribcs  to  the  primitivc  timcs. 153.  Cantlns— Martl ; 

Evandcr  is  ?ai<1,  abovo,  47,  48,  to  havo  warnod  Acnoas  of  tho  dangors  to  bo 


BOOK    ELEVENTH.  579 

encountered  ia  tlic  war  bj'  Pallas.  It  is  implied,  of  course,  tiiat  Pallas  him- 
eelf  was  cautioned  against  too  much  impetuosity.  We  may  infer  that  the 
admonition  given  to  Pallas  is  now  running  in  the  mind  of  the  old  man,  and 
therefore  supply  7noncntl  iiitcv  promissa  dederas  parenti ;  thus  tlie  sense  will 
be,  "  thou  hadst  not  given  thesc  promises  (promises  of  such  conduct)  to  thy 
father,  when  warning  thee  that  thou  shouldst  be  willing  very  cautiously,"  &c. 
Forbiger  and  others  take  ut  in  the  sense  of  utinam.  Since  the  above  inter- 
pretation  occurred  to  me,  I  feel  the  more  confident  of  its  correctness  on 

finding  it  also  given  by  Dr.  Bryce,  ■with  whom  I  believe  it  is  original. 

161.  Secutam;  supply  me. — —163,  163.  Obrnerent,  dedlsscni,  rcferrot;  0 

that !  kc.     The  optative  use  of  the  subjunct.     Comp.  iv.  678,  x,  854. 

166.  Sij  almost  equivalent  to  quando,  since ;  "but  if  a  premature  death 
awaited  my  son,  (as  indeed  it  did,)  it  would  have  pleased  me,  (had  I  knowa 
his  destiny,)  myself  leading  {ducentem)  the  Trojans  agaiust  Latium,  to  have 
fallen,  after  slaying  thousands  of  the  Volsci."  Evauder  here,  as  well  as  in 
the  foregoiflg  verses,  from  the  160th,  is  speaking  of  himself.  This  inter- 
pretation,  which  is  that  of  Jahn,  is  a  somewhat  bold  departure  from  the 
ordinary  one,  which  refers  duccntem  to  Pallas.  The  reading  juvaret  is  pre- 
ferred  to  juvabit  by  the  best  commentators,  and  it  rests  on  the  best  manu- 
script  authority.- — ITl.  TjTrhcniqac — TyiThenam  ;  supply  the  copula; 
both  the  Etruscan  leaders  and  the  whole  army  of  the  Etruscans.  Wagner 
cemarks  "  that  the  repetition  of  a  word  somctimes  has  the  same  force  as  the 

repetition  of  the  copula." 172.  Tropaea  {virorum)  quos. ITI.  Esset  = 

sifuissef. 1T9,  180.  Meritis — locns  ;  for  t]uj  services  and  for  ihy  fortime 

this  (additional)  opportunity  alone  is  cpen  to  thee.  Thou  canst  achieve  now 
only  one  thing  more  for  my  benefit  and  for  increasing  thy  glory,  and  that  ia 

the  destruction  of  Turnus.     Meritis  &ndfortunae  are  in  the  dative. 180. 

Vitae  ;  dative  ;  for  life  ;  that  is,  for  ihe  living,  or  for  me,  the  living ;  as  op- 

^QSQi.  io  nato  suh  manes. 181.  Perferre;  to  repori;  to  atinounce  to  my 

son  the  joyful  news  of  vengeance  achieved.  The  Jnfinitive  depends  on 
quaero. 

182-224.  Description  of  the  fnneral  ceremonies  of  tlie  Trojans  and  of  the  Latics  in 
lionor  of  those  slain  iu  the  recent  battle,  and  the  discordant  sentimeats  of  the  Latins 
ahout  the  continuance  of  the  war. 

186.  Ignilins  atris.    See  on  iv.  884.-^ — 193.  Hiiic;  thcn;  the  reading 

hic  is  not  so  well  authorized. 195.  Monera  nota  ;  familiar  toJcens;  mune- 

ra  are  all  ofierings  in  honor  of  the  dead ;  here  nota,  because  they  are  the 
arms  which  the  deceased  had  usually  borne ;  so  velajnina  nota,  vi.  221.——— 

197.  Morti ;    a  personification  of  death  as  a  goddess. 208.  Crcm.int ; 

amoug  the  Italiaus  the  dead  were  sometimes  burned  and  sometimes  buried. 

211.  Bnebant ;  transitive,  as  in  i.  35  and  85  ;  they  were  turning  up  the 

ashes  in  order  to  gather  up  the  remains ;  this  was  the  ossilegium. 212. 

Focis ;  from  the  pyre. Tepido ;  Wagner  understands  this  of  the  heated 

ground  near  the  smouldering  pyre.     This  ground  ia  dug  up  and  hcaped 


580  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

upon  Ihc  coUccted  bones  and  ashcs. 213.  Frlic  ;  in  apposition  with  tectis^ 

Tvhicli  here  denotcs  thc  dwellings  of  the  city,  as  opposcd  to  thc  opea  coun- 

try,  whero  the  forcgoing  incidcnts  have  transpired. 219.  Qai  pcscat. 

Gr.  §  264,  8 ;  Z.  g  501. 

225-299.  Wliile  llie  Latins  aro  tlius  (iistractcd,  the  cnvoys  Tvho  liad  bccn  Ecnt  to 
Diomedes  rcturn  ■with  an  uufaTorablo  answcr  from  that  chicf.  Latinus  assemblee  a 
council,  and  the  envoys  describe  thoir  iLterviow  with  Diomedes,  and  rcpcat  the  vrorda 
in  which  he  advises  tho  Latins  to  mako  peaco  vrith  Acneas. 

327.  Lfgati ;  thc  cmbassy  headed  by  Yenukis,  mentioned  in  viii.  Q-lT. 

232.  Fatalcm  ferri ;  for  csse  fatalem ;  that  Aeneas  is  the  onc  destined, 

&c.    Comp.  vii.  272. 235.  Impcrio  accitCS ;  summ*ned  by  {h\s)  command ; 

so  Heyne.      But  ncinrich  takes  impcrio  ia  the  dative. 239.   Aetola; 

the  city  of  Diomcdcs,  Argyripa,  or  Arpi.     Sce  on  x.  28. 212.  Faricr. 

Seeoniv.  493. 213.  €astra;  fovurbem. 246.  Patriac  gcntis ;  Argyri- 

pa  is  a  name  dcrived  by  Diomcdes  frora  Argos  Jlippion,  a  city  of  Pclopon- 

nesus,  his  former  home. 24T.  Gargani  lapygis ;  of  ihe  lapygian  Garga- 

nus.  Mount  Garganus,  now  Mount  St.  Angelo  in  Apuha.  lapyx  is  hcre 
used  adjectively  for  lap-ygiiis,  and  also  as  Eynonymous  -with  Ajndus,  and 

Daunius. 255.  Quicamquc ;  cquivalcnt  to  nos  omnes  qui. 257.  Quos ; 

here  interrogative  in  the  sense  of  quot  and  quantos.   Thiel. 259.  Mfinas  ; 

in  apposition  -svith  the  subjcci  of  exjocncZmMs. 260.  Sidas;  for  tcmpestas; 

the  allusion  is  to  the  destruction  of  Ajax  the  lcss,  mcntioned  in  i.  39;  sce 

note  on  that  passage. 262.  Protci  colnmnas ;  the  island  of  Pharos  and 

the  coast  of  Egypt,  ^^'hither  Menelaus  was  driven.     See  Odyss.  iv.  854-305. 

264.  Ecgaa  Ncoptolemi.    See  iii.  S25-33G. 265.  Idomenei.    See  on 

iii.  122. Locros  ;  a  part  of  the  Opuntian  Locri,  followcrs  of  Ajax  the  less, 

settled  on  the  coast  of  Africa.  Comp.  iii.  399,  and  note.  As  Aencas  has 
left  some  of  his  followers  as  colonies  at  one  or  more  points  during  his  voy- 
ages,  so  it  is  credible  that  the  Locri  also,  and  perhaps  others,  may  in  hkc 
manncr  during  thcir  -wanderings  have  becn  divided  iuto  difierent  colonics. 

266.  Myceaaeus.     Sec  on  Mycenae,  i.  284. 268.  DcTietam — adulter ; 

the  adulterer  has  murdered  {lain  in  wait  for')  the  conqueror  of  Asia.  Devic- 
tam  Asia7n  is  equivalcnt  to  Asiae  victorem.     Adulter  rcfcrs  to  Acgisthus. 

269.  lavidissc  may  bc  taken  as  thc  indepcndcnt  infiuitivc,  as  jn  i.  37,  or 

as  depcnding  on  refcram.     The  latter  construction  is  preferrcd  by  Wagncr. 

• 2T0.  Calydona  ;  Calydon,  in  Actolia,  tlie  native  place  of  Diomcdes. 

276.  FcrrOj  ctc.     Scc  on  x.  29. Corpora ;  Diomcdcs  had  woundcd  both 

Vcnus  and  Mars. 280.  Malorum  ;  nhGv  mcmini. 287.  Dardanus;  iha 

Trojan  ;  for  Trojani. 293.  Qua ;  i7i  whatevcr  way,  on  whatever  ierms. 

800-4-44.  Latinus  proposes  to  mako  pcaco  •wilh  tho  Trojans,  and  to  yicld  to  thcm  a 
portioii  of  Jhh  land  on  Iho  Tiber  for  their  scltlomont,  or,  if  thcy  prcfor  to  6cok  auothor 
counlry,  to  furnish  them  with  ships.  Drancea  ndviscs  also  that  Lavinia  shall  bo  given 
to  Aeneas  in  marriagc,  and  calla  on  Turnus  either  to  glve  up  tho  contcst  or  to  dccido 
It  by  Binglo  combat  wlth  Aencas.  Turuus  replics  with  animation,  nnd  conBcntB  to  th« 
Binglc  combat. 


BOOK    ELEVENTH.  581 

303.  Faerat  melins ;  supply  the  protasis,  si  factum  csset. 309.  Poni- 

te  ;  for  deponite. 310.  Cetera  ;  all  the  warlike  resources  of  the  state. 

311.  Ante  ocalos,  intcrmantts;  before  your  eyes,  between  your  hands ;  i.  e. 

they  are  both  visible  and  tangible. 316.  Tnsco  amni ;  the  Tiber,    Comp. 

viii.  47o. 317.  Sicanos ;  from  viii.  828,  ■we  learn  that  the  Sicani  once 

dwelt  in  Latium. 319.  Hornm  (collium)  asperrima,   Comp.  strata  viarum. 

i.  422,  and  note. 321.  Cedat  amieitiae  Teucrornm  ;  let  it  fall  to  the  Tro* 

jans  in  token  of  friendship. 321.  Gentem ;  country ;  as  in  i.  533. < 

328.  Modnm;  the  construction ;  the  mode  of  construction. 329.  Acra. 

See  on  acre,  i.  35. Maans ;  artisans  and  laborers  for  building  the  ships. 

Navalia;  equipments. — —335.  In  mediam;  for  ihe  common  good. 

336-338.  Idcm  infeusns,  largos  ;  at  once  hostile-,  generous,  &c. ;  the  ordinary 

form  would  have  been,  infensus,  idem  largus. 339.  Dextcra ;   supply 

erat. Hal)itns  (es<) ;  he  was  regarded  as. 341.  Incertnm  fercbat ;  sup- 

ply  genus  and  is. 342.  Ouerat;   namely,  Turnum. 345.  Ferat;  de- 

mands. 346.   Flatns  ;    passion,  arrogance. 350.    Troia ;    for  Troica. 

351.  Fugae  fidens  ;  an  allusion  to  the  forced  flight  of  Turnus  described 

in  X.  665  sqq. ;  which  Drances  interprets  to  his  disadvantage,  and  contrasta 

with  the  pretension  implied  in  coelam  tcrritat  armis. 363.  Pignus ;  La- 

vinia.    The  only  sure  pledge  of  peace  is  the  marriage  of  Aeneas  and  Lavinia. 

364i  luTisnm ;  here  iu  an  active  sense ;  hostile. 365.  Nil  moror ;  I 

make  it  of  little  account,  I  consider  it  but  a  small  matter,  attended  witli 

little  danger,  to  be  your  enemy. 366.  Pnlsns ;  since  you  have  been  de- 

feated  in  the  war. 3T1.  Scilicct ;  ay,  forsooth. 383.  Proinde  =  quae 

cum  ita  sint. 384.  Qnando  ;  since ;  inasmuchas;  the  language  is  ironi- 

cal. 397.  Die ;  in  a  day. 400.  Rebns  tnis ;  to  thy  party,  or,  to  thy 

cause;  as  if  Drances  had  gone  over  to  the  Trojan  side. 405.  Anfidns; 

the  Aufidus,  now  the  Ofanto,  a  river  of  Apulia.     In  fleeing  back  from  the 
Adriatic,  as  if  fearing  the  Trojans,  it  represents  the  fear  of  Diomed  whose 

country  it  passes  through. 406.  Vcl  cnm ;  or  (again  he,  Drances,  shows 

his  cowardice)  when;  translate,   then,  also;  or,  ay,  also. 407.  Artificis 

seelns ;  for  artifex  scelestus ;  the  accursed  falsifier ;  with  scelus,  put  for  the 

person.     Comp.  the  use  of  nefas,  ii.  685. FormidJne;    throughfear; 

through  a  pretence  of  fearing  me,  Drances  seeks  to  strengthen  the  charge 

he  brings  against  me,  of  threatening  him  with  violence. 415.  0  si  ia 

elliptical.     The  complete  sense  is :  If  we  possessed  any  thing  of  our  wonted 

manhood,  and  0  that  it  were  so. 416.  Illc  mihi,  etc. ;  he  in  my  opinion, 

&c.     After  the  condition,  si  adesset,  the  regular  form  would  have  been  habe- 
revius  illum  fortunatum,  qui  procubicisset,  etc. ;  but  Turnus,  to  avoid  giving 

offence,  chooses  to  express  the  sentiment  as  his  own. 416, 417.  Labornm, 

animi.     Gr.  §  213,  R.  1,  (a);  Z.  §  437;  comp.  above,  126. 418.  Scmel; 

once  for  all. 438.  Vel  praestet  Achillen ;  even  though  he  present  Achilles; 

i.  e.  though  he  were  another  Achilles. 439.  Paria ;  cqual  to  the  arma 

made  by  Vulcan  for^chilles. 443,  444.  Nec — toUat;  the  sentiment  is 


582  NOTES   ON   THE   AENEID. 

tliis :  Neitber,  if  this  contcst  is  to  terminate  fatally  to  us  througli  the  angel 
of  the  gods,  let  Drances  be  the  one  to  appeasc  their  anger  by  his  death,  foj 
I  niyself  would  ratlier  do  that, — nor  if  success  and  glory  are  to  be  won,  let 
him  take  them  to  hiuiself,  for  I  myself  desire  the  honor. 

445-531.  Tho  council  of  Latinus  is  interrupted  by  the  announcement  that  the  Tr» 
jans  in  battle  array  are  niarching  against  Laurentum.  "turnus  takes  advantago  of  tlie 
occasion  to  rouee  tho  Latins  inetantly  to -war.  Ile  meots  Camilla  at  tho  gate  of  tho 
city,  and  gives  her  tho  direction  of  the  cavah'y,  "which  is  to  encountcr  that  of  Aeneas 
on  the  plain,  'whilo  Turnus  himself  prepares  with  the  infantry  an  ambuscade  iu  a 
thickly  wooded  mountain  pass,  through  •which  Aeneas  "with  the  Trojan  infantry  ia 
espected  to  march. 

446.  Castra  niovcbant ;  a  military  phrase  for  "  breaking  up  an  encamp- 

menf;"  here  for  "drawing  the  troops  out  of  camp." 450.  Dcsccndcre; 

that  they  were  advancing  ;  the  infiaitive  depends  on  nuntius. 457.  Pada" 

sae ;  Fadusa,  now  il  Po  d^Argenta,  the  southern  mouth  of  the  Po.     It  was, 

lilie  the  Cayster,  much  frcquented  by  swans. 461.  Illi ;  the  enemy. 

464,  465.  MessJipns,  Coras ;    nominative  for  tbe  vocative,  Messape,  Cora. 

Sec  Gr.  §  52 ;  Z.  §  492. Cnm  fratrc  ;  for  ef  ejus  frater.     For  the  plural, 

diffanditc,  see  Gr.  §  209,  R.  12,  (G). 467.  Jass(r,  for  jussero.     See  Gr. 

§  162,  9;  Z.  §  161. 473.  Praefodiant  alii  portas;  oihers  dig  trenches  be- 

fore  the  gates. 475.  Varia  ;  the  circle  of  defenders  is  made  up  of  persons 

old  and  young  of  both  sexes. 480.  Tanti  retains  its  final  vowel  here. 

483.  De  limine  ;  according  to  the  ancient  custom  prayer  was  ofiered  at 

the  thrcshold  of  the  temple. 491.  Praccipit.     Comp.  above,  18. 500. 

Desilnit ;  Camilla  and  her  followers  dismount  in  token  of  respect  for  Turnus. 

501.  Ire  depends  both  on  audeo  and  promitto,  which  together  contain 

the  notion  of  paratus  sum. 506.  Pcdcs ;  on  foot ;  i.  e.  "  with  the  foot 

Boldiery." 509.  Parem.     Gr.  §  260,  R.  5 ;  Z.  §  580. Qnando ;  since. 

513.    Qnatercnt  campos;    that  they  might  scour  the  plains;    for  the 

omission  of  ut,  see  Z.  §  62-t. 514.    JngO  snpcrans  (ea);  surmounting 

(these  solitary  hcights)  hy  the  summit. 515.  Fnrta  bclli;  «  stratagem  of 

war;  an  ambuscade. 516.  BiTias  fanccs;  a  gorgc  opening  at  cach  cx- 

tremity  into  a  road ;  ad  quas  duac  viae  {ab  tdraqtie  parte)  ducunt. 522. 

Talles ;    an    archaic    nominativc    form    of   vallis. 527.    Ignota ;    unob- 

served;    not  visible  to  those  passing  through  thc  dcCIe. 529.    Instjire 

jngis ;  to  maintain  your  stand  on  the  hill  tops. 531.  Iniqois ;  dangerous  ; 

i.  e.  to  Aeneas. 

532-596.  Diana  looking  down  from  Olympus  bcholds  Camilla  advancing  to  battle, 
jvid  forcBccing  her  fate,  comraissions  OpiB,  onc  of  her  nymiihs,  to  descend  and  elny 
any  ouo,  whothcr  Trojan  or  Italian,  who  ehall  slay  Camilla. 

536.  Nostrls  armis;  Camilla  is  armed  with  thc  quivcr,  bow,  and  arrows, 

the  arms  pcculiar  to  Diana  and  hcr  nymphs. 540.  Privcmo ;  Prirer' 

num;  an  ancicnt  town  of  the  Volsci  on  tlie  Amascnus. 553.    Roboro 

cocto;  with  weU-seasoned  oak;  ot,  mth  oah  hardened  by  fre. 552-554» 

Tclnm — linle  impllcat ;  an  instaice  of  anacoluthon,  nofinappropriato  i:a  thc» 


BOOK   ELEVENTH.  583 

description  of  sucli  au  exciting  incident.     See  on  i.  23Y. 555.  HaMlein 

{eam) ;  light ;  sbe  could  be  easily  hurlcd,  wlien  thus  attachcd  to  the  shaft 

of  the  spear. 558.  Tna — fngit ;  in  this  order:  prhna  ienens  tela  tua  per 

aurasfugit  hostein.    Frima  iov  primicm;  for  thefirst  time. 562.  Sonaere 

nndilC ;  the  waves  (of  the  overflowing  river)  resoiinded;  thus  making  tlie 
scene  still  more  frightful.  This  is  Thiel's  interpretation.  Others  understand 
that  the  waves  are  made  to  vibrate  like  the  air  itself,  by  the  swift  passage 

of  the  spear  so  near  the  surface  of  tlie  water. 56G.  Sonnm  Tmiae  *,  a  vo- 

tive  offering  to  (me)  Liana.  See  on  iv.  511,  vi.  13. 568.  IVeqne — dcdlsset ; 

nor  would  he  with  his  (by  reason  of  his)  icildness  have  yielded;  i.  e.  even  if 

the  Volsci  had  wished  him  to  be  reconciled.     Dare  manus  is  to  yield. 

590.  naec  ;  thesearms;  arcum  et  pharetra^n. 

597-724.  Tho  opposing  forces  of  cavalry  come  ia  eight  of  each  otber,  rapidiy  ad- 
vance,  and  rush  to  tbe  cbarge,  each  party"aTternately  pursuing  and  retreating.  Camil- 
la  is  distLQguished  by  her  deeds  both  on  horseback  and  on  foot, 

599.  Compositi  nnniero  in  tnrmas ;  divided  into  troops  in  equal  numbers  ; 

literally,  hy  numher. 601.  Ilnc  Ct  hnc ;  the  fiery  horse,   impatient  of 

restraint,  springs  now  this  way,  now  that. 607.  Adventns ;  the  advance  ; 

implying  "the  noise  of  the  advancing  squadrons." Irdcscit ;  for  crescit ; 

rises  louder  and  louder. 609.  — qne  ;  joined  in  scanuing  with  the  follow- 

ing  verse. 612.  Tyrrlienns ;  here  the  name  of  some  Etruscan  warrior, 

Aeontens  ;    a    Latin    warrior. 614.    Pcrfracta ;    proleptic. 615. 

Pectora  pcctoribns  rampnnt ;  comp.  x.  361 ;  they  dash  their  horses  oae 
against  the  other,  breast  against  breast,  and  Aconteus  is  hurled  by  the 

shock  far  from  his  seat. 616.  Tormento  ponderls  actl ;  of  a  stone  casf 

by  an  engine ;  i.  e.  by  a  ballista. 617.  Praccipitat.     See  on  ii.  9. 

622.  Hloliia  colla;  theflexible  necis  (of  their  horses.) 624.  Alterno  gnr- 

gite;  with  aUcrnating  billovj ;  now  advancing  and  now  receding. 626. 

Extremam  arcnam  ;  the  inmost  strand. Sinn ;  with  the  curving  wave  ;  the 

iong  sweeping  wave  advances  across  the  beach,  curving  inward  more  and 

more,  whilc  diminishing  in  volume  and  force. 628.  Yado  labente ;  the 

shallow  sinking  away ;  when  the  wave  retires,  the  shallow  water  along  the 

beach  ghdes  away. 633.  Gcmitns ;  supply  est  or  erat. 635.  Semiani- 

mes;   sem-yan-i-mes. 649.   Exserta.     See  on  i.  492. 654.  Converso  ; 

like  the  Parthian  horsemen  when  retreating,  she  would  turn  partially  round 

on  the  horse,  and  discharge  ber  arrows  back  upon  the  pursuers. 659. 

Tlireiciae;  Thracian;  not  here  in  its  strict  sense,  but  as  an  appellative  of 
objects  lying  far  to  the  north,  as  the  Thermodou,  which,  like  Thrace  itself, 
is  conceived  by  Virgil  as  situated  in  a  northerly  region,  though  in  Cappado- 

cia. 660.  Pnlsant ;  when  the  river  is  frozen  over. 666.  Clytio  ;  sup- 

ply   natum. 670.    Snpcr;    besides. 671.    Dnm   colligit;    the    horse, 

wounded  under  the  body,  bends  down  with  his  hind  legs,  thus  unseating, 
but  not  throwing  off,  his  rider,  who  grasps  at  the  reins,  and  draws  thera 
tightly  in  the  effort  to  prevent  hiraself  from  falling 678.  lapyge ;  adjec- 


584 


NOTES   ON    THE    AENEID. 


tive,  as  abore,  iu  241. C84.  igraine  vcrso ;  his  troop  having  been  put  tc 

Jlight.     When  thc  troop  iu  the  midst  of  which  hc  had  advanced,  had 


Amozou  iu  batlle. 


BOOK    ELEVENTH.  585 

turned  round  and  retreated,  he  was  left  alone,  and  thus  it  was  not  difficult 

for  Camilla  to  cut  him  off. 685.  Saper  ;  as  in  670. 687,  688.  Advcnlt 

qnl,  eto. ;  the  day  has  come  which  shall  have  refuted  (was  dcstined  to  rcfutc) 
7/our  words  by  means  of  a  womarCs  arms ;  Ornytus  has  espressed  coutempt 

for  the  Latins  and  their  female  allies. ^Xomen;  fame. 692.  Scdcntis  ; 

sitting  on  his  horse,  and  exposing  his  neck  by  beuding  forward  in  urging 

his  flight, 694.   Fngiens ;   flying,  but  only  in  pretencc. 695.  Intc- 

rior ;  in  the  language  of  the  circus  this  was  the  same  as  ab  laeva,  on  ihe  left, 

because  the  chariot  turned  the  goal  to  the  left. 699.  Incidit  linic ;  her 

ihe  son  of  Aunus  encountered. TOl.  J^ot  the  last  of  the  Ligurians  (i.  e.  in 

deccit)  ichile  the  fates  suffered  him  to  practise  deceit.     The  Ligurians  were 

noted  for  cunning. T08.  Diniitte  f ngam ;  give  up  the  chance  of  flifjht; 

the  advantage  of  being  able  to  escape  on  horseback.     So  Forbiger.     But 

Heyne  understands/M^am  merely  as  cursum  equestretn. T17.  Anno  ;  both 

the  father  and  son  are  named  Aunus. T^l.  Saecr;  the  hawk  is  sacred,  as 

connected  with  the  sacred  auguries. 

725-835.  Tarchon,  incited  by  Jupiter,  roproaches  the  Tyrrhenians  for  their  coward- 
ice,  and  sets  tliem  tho  exaniplo  of  hraviry  hy  attacliina:  Vcnulus,  (see  viii.  9  sqq.,) 
whom  he  tears  from  his  horse,  and  bearing  him  away  on  his  own,  stahs  him.  Arruns 
watches  the  course  of  Camill;t,and  stealthily  keeps  herwithin  the  rangeof  his  javelin, 
■until,  in  an  unguarded  moment,  while  she  pursues  Chloreus,  he  hurls  the  wcapon 
with  fatal  aim,  and  picrces  her  breast.  Bhe  falls  from  her  horse,  and  sending  Acca  to 
summon  Turnus,  she  dies. 

T30.  Alas;  thecavalry.     Comp,  iv.  121.- T3S.  Exspectare  depcnds  on 

segnes. T-iO.    Hostia  pingnis ;    if  the   soothsaycr  announced  favorable 

omens,  (secundus  haruspcx,)  a  victim  was  slain  and  a  sacrificial  feast  was 

held  in  the  sacred  grove. T41.  Moritnrns  et  ipse;  hlmself  also  resolved  to 

die ;  not  less  than  those  whom  Camilla  has  slain. T59.  Maconidac  ;  an- 

other  term  for  Lydi ;  the  Tyrrhcnia7is.     Com.p.  viii.  479,  499,  ix.  11. 

T60.  Prioi' ;  excelling  (her) ;  or  clse,  with  Heyne,  prevcrtens  eam,  dum  latcri 

semper  ac^caeret. T6T.    ifflprobns;    with  deadly  purpose. TTO,  TTl. 

Pcilis — tcgcbat ;  the  covering  of  the  horse  was  tJie  skin  of  a  wild  beast 
adorned  with  plates  of  bronze  wrought  into  the  form  of  scales,  and  lying 
ovcr  each  other  like  feathers.     It  was  fastened  under  the  body  of  the  horse 

with  golden  clasps. TT5.  Sinns  crepantes;  rustling  folds. T85.  Sorac- 

tis;  Soracte,  now  Monte  di  S.  Oreste,  in  the  country  of  thfc  Fahsci,  north  of 
Rorne.  The  Hirpini  or  priests  of  Apollo  on  this  mountain  were  accustomed 
to  walk  over  burning  coals.  Their  feet  wcre  guarded,  however,  as  Varro 
says,  by  some  kind  of  ointment.  Arruns,  perhaps,  had  been  driven  away 
from  the  neighborhood  of  Soracte  by  his  countrymen,  who  were  now  fight- 
•  iug  under  Messapus  aud  Turnus.     Hence  as  an  exile  he  is  acting  with  their 

euemies. T86.  Ardor ;  flame. T88.  Premimns  Yestigia ;  tve  plant  our 

footsieps. T98.  lu  Kotos.    Comp.  ix.  312,  S13. 822.   Parlirl ;   was 

wont  to  share.     Comp.  iv.  422. 

25* 


5S6  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

836-915.  Opis  now  executes  the  command  of  Diana  (see  above,  591,  592)  hy  Blaying 
Arruns.  The  Latin  cavalry,  aftcr  the  fall  of  Camilla,  rotreats  to  the  walls  of  Lauren- 
tum,  aud  the  foremost  of  tho  fugitivos  cro-n-d  into  the  gatefe.  But  the  gatcs  are  hastily 
Bhut,  and  many  are  left  to  perish  at  the  hands  of  the  pursuers  before  the  walls.  Tur- 
mis  abandons  hia  ambuscade,  and  hastens  to  tho  rescue,  while  the  Trojan  infantry 
under  Aeneas  passcs  tlirougli  tho  defile  in  eafety,  and  appears  beforo  Laurciitum. 
Both  the  Trojaus  and  Latins  thcn  encamp  for  the  uiglit. 

81T.  Faniani — iiiultae  ;  iwr  shalt  thou  suffer  the  wronff  (infamy)  of  heing 

unavengcd;    literally,   of  one  unavenged. 850.    Dcrccuni;    an  uiiknown 

king  of  Latium. 851.  Yana  tnmcntem  ;  sicclling  v:ith  arrogance. S5S. 

Thrcissa  •,  as  a  huntress. 861.   Manibns  acquis ;   wlth  equal  hands  hcrc 

means  the  two  hands  brought  into  one  line. 880.  Inimica  snper  prcmit 

tnrba ;  besides  (tlie  danger  from  the  enemy)  Ihe  perilous  [inimica)  throng 
(of  their  own  countrymen)  crusJies  them.  This  is  rorbiger's  interpretatiou. 
Others  refer  ininiica  tiirha  to  the  puisuers,  a  portion  of  whom  might  niingle 

with  the  fugitivcs  c.ntering  the  gates. 892.  Monstrat;  teachcs ;   shows 

thcm  how  to  defend  themselves.  The  following  words,  nt  Yidcre  Cimillam, 
are  included  by  some  in  the  parenthesis,  and  thus  niade  to  qualify  monstrat. 

904.  Apcrtos;  unoccupied  by  the  cnemy. ^913.  Gargite  Ilibero;  in 

the  Iherian  (or  Spanish)  sea;  i.  e.  in  that^^art  of  the  ocean  which  is  adjacent 
to  Spain, 


BOOK   TWELFTH.  587 


BOOK    XIL 

The  final  conflict  between  Aeneas  and  Turnus. 

1-133.  Turnus,  seeing  tho  Latins  now  exhausted  and  hopcless,  resolves,  In  epite  of 
the  earnest  remonstrancos  of  Latinus  and  Amata,  to  make  an  end  of  the  coutest  hy 
eingle  combat  with  Aeneas.  The  latter  accopts  tho  proposition,  a  solemn  compact  is 
entered  into  by  the  hostile  parties,  and  all  the  preparations  are  made  for  the  flght. 

1.  Infractos.    Comp.  v.  1S4,  ix.  499. 5.   I!le.    See  ou  x.  707. 

7.  Latronis ;  i.  e.  the  buntsman,  who  has  come  upon  the  lion  by  stealtb. 

13.  Coneipe  foedas ;  draw  up  the  compact ;  make  it  in  the  customary 

hiuguage,  or,  verbis  ex  more  conceptis. 16.  Crimeu  commnne ;  the  common 

complaint.     See  xi.  215  sqq.     I  will  silence  tbe  common  accusation  that  I 
am  invjolving  the  wbole  nation  in  a  ruinous  war ;  I  will  individually  encoun- 

ter  tbe  whole  danger. 26.  Animo  ;  supply  tuo. 31.  Gencro  ;  Aeucas, 

to  whom  Lavinia  had  been  promised  in  marriage.     Sce  vii.  267  sqq. 33. 

lUo  ;    supply  tempore. 35.    Becalent ;    re  ofteu   dcnotes,  accordiug  to 

Vf  agner,  not  a  repetition,  but  a  mere  change  of  state  ;  hcre  the  sense  is  not 
"again  heated,"  but  merely  "beated,"  as  a  changed  condition ; — no  longer 

cold. 3T.  Qno — toties ;  whereto  do  I  so  often  turn  away  (from  my  pur- 

pose)  ?  namely,  of  giving  Lavinia  to  Aeneas. 39.  Incolami ;  supply  Tur- 

no. 43.  Res  bello  Tarias ; /or^wnes  varying  in  war.     Comp.  x.  160. 

44.  Longe  ;  like  procul,  only  a  relative  term ;  far  from  tbee  in  thy  perils ; — 

for  any  distance  under  such  circumstances  is  "  far." 46.  Medendo.     See 

Gr.  §  275,  R.  2;  Z.  §  658. 52,  53.   Qaae  tegat,  occalat;    bcfore  these 

words  tbe  idea  of  quam  vocahit  is  involved.     TuIIy  expressed :  He  will  not 
be  aided  by  bis  motber,  wbom  he  will  call  upon  tbat  sbe  may  cover  him, 

(sese,)  &c.     For  tbe  subj.  sec  Gr.  §  266,  S ;  Z.  §  545. 55.  Moritara ;  re- 

solved  io  die.     Comp..iv.  604,  xi.  741.—: — 74.  Neqne — mortis  ;  nor  indecd  is 
any  delay  of  death  (if  tbat  awaits  me)  left  to  (J^ree  td)  Turnus.     He  has  no 

power  to  delay  death. 82.  Ante  ora.     Comp.  ii.  531,  v.  553. 83.  Ori- 

thyia ;  0-ri-thy-ia  ;  the  wife  of  Boreas. 8T.  Dehluc  ;  here  de-hinc. 88. 

Aptat   Iiabeado ;    he   mahes  ready   by  handling ;    ascertains   by   handling 
whether  all  are  in  good  order;   so  Forbiger.      Heyne  makes  habendo  in 

the  dative. 100.  Vibratos  ;  crisped;   made  to  appear  waving. 101, 

102.  Ab  ore  absistnnt ;  leap  forth  from  his  cou7itenance. 104.  Irasci  in 

cornna  ;  to  collect  bis  rage  for  fighting  with  his  horns.     Forbiger. 115« 

Lnccm  ;  for  ignes. 118.  FOCOS  ;  afocus,  or  reccptacle  for  coals,  is  placed 

upon  tbe  altar  of  turf. 119.  Fontcm  ;  living  water  must  be  uscd  for  wasb« 

ing.  before  sacrifices  are  made. fSO.  Velati  limo  ;  girdcd  loith  the  apron; 

«vitb  the  covcriug  worn  about  the  abdomcu  by  thosc  who  killcd  the  victinia 


588  NOTES    ON    THE    AENEID. 

and  performcd  othcr  subordinatc  dutics  at  a  sacrifice.  Hence  they  wcr« 
cafled  limocincti. 

134-281.  Juturna,  the  Bistcr  of  Turnus,  is  advised  by  Juno  to  prcvent  Ijy  Eome 
mcans  tlic  proposed  o-«yil  between  Aeucas  and  Tnrnus,  as  it  will  prove  fatal  to  tho 
latter.  Meantimc  La^.««s  aud  Aeueas  euter  upon  the  solemn  cercmonieB  of  the  cove- 
nant  of  peacc.  Juturna  talies  the  form  of  Camers,  and,  while  tho  sacrcd  rites  are  pro- 
cecding,  excites  tho  compassion  of  the  Latins  for  Turnus.  When  they  are  thus  incited, 
Tolumnius  hurla  his  spear  into  the  midst  of  tho  allies  of  Aeneas  and  slays  one  of  tbeir 
numbcr. 

138.  Tnrni  sororeni ;  Juturna;  shc  was  properly  thc  nymph  of  a  fountain 
nhich  flowed  from  the  foot  of  the  Alban  mount,  and,  after  forming  a  lalie, 
desccndcd  into  thc  Tibcr.     Shc  was  numbored  among  the  native  deities  of 

Latium. 148.    Cedere ;   for  be^ie  cedcrc  ;   to  proaper. Latio  ;    to  La^ 

tium;   i.  e.  to  the  Latins. 152.  Praescntins;   more  advantagcous. 

159.  Anctor;  adviser  ov  abettor. 161.  Reges  ;  of  the  omission  of  thc  verb 

{eimt  or  vehuntnr')  here,  Thiel  remarlis,  that  thc  jwet  expresses  the  general 
substantive  first,  and  after  it  places  tlie  individual  substantives  QLatinus, 
Turnus)  in  the  same  case  with  it;  omitting  the  verb  -with  the  generalierm, 
and  conuccting  it  with  the  iudividual  substantives  in  the  singular ;  a  con- 

struction  which  is  not  unusual  in  such  cases. 164.  Solis  ari  speciniCQ  ;  an 

emhleni  of  the  sun,  his  ancestor.  It  is  implied  that  Latinns  has  derivcd  his 
parentage,  ou  onc  side,  from  Circe,  the  daughter  of  the  sun.     Some  identify 

Marica  (see  vii.  4*7)  with  Circe. Bigis  albis;  in  a  chariot  with  white  horses. 

See  abovc,   8-4. 113,   174.    Tcmpora  notant ;  they  marlv  the  sacrificial 

victims   simply  by  cutting   off  the   hairs   on   the   forehcad.     See    on  iv. 

698. 180.  Pater.     Comp.  iii.  35. Torqncs;  controllest. 181,183. 

Qnae — rcligio ;  ivhatevcr  (there  is)  divine  in  the  lofty  air ;  whatevcr  attri- 

bute  of  the  acther  demands  religious  adoration. 18T.  Nostrnm  Martcm 

=  secundum   Martem;    successful    conflict.      See   on   nostro,   ii.    S96. 

192.  Sacra — dabo;  I  wiU  assif/n  (to  the  newly  confederated  peoplc)  their 
sacrcd  rites  and  theirgodi;  I  will  claim  only  to  makc  thc  worsliip  of 
Vesta  and  the  Trojau  pcnatcs  the  paramount  reh'gion>  As  to  Latinus,  lct 
him  be  supreme  in  war  and  also  retain  his  wonted  (solcmne)  authority  in 

civil  affairs. 137.  Tcrram,  etc.     For  the  omission  of  per,  see  on  vi.  324. 

198.  Gcnns  dnplex;    the  twin  offsprinrj ;   Apollo  and  Diana. 200. 

Fulminc  sancit ;  Jupiter  sanctions  troaties  by  punishing  the  violators  of 

them  with  his  thuuderbolt. 201.  Dlcdios ;  in  the  midst ;  placcd  on  the 

top  of  the  altar,  and  iu  the  midst  of  tlic  top. 206.  l't;  so  truly  as. 

209.  Matrc;  its  parent  trunk.— 216.  Vidcri ;  historical  infinitive. 218. 

Kon  viribns  aeqnis ;  Wagner  makes  tliis  an  ablativc  of  quality  limiting  coa 
understood.     Translatc  thc  passago,  when  thcy  more  ncarly  (from  a  nearcr 

point  of  vicw)  ^crccji-c  that  llicy  are  of  unrqual  sircnyth. 219.  Adjnvat ; 

1.  e.  variimi  iUum  animorum  motum. ^227.  lland  nescia  rernni ;  knowing 

wcU  how  to  take  advantage  of  the  occasion. 232.  Fatalis  manas ;  ihe 


BOOK   TWELFTH.  589 

band  led  byfate  ;  referring  to  the  Etrurians,  who  had  becn  Icd  by  their  be- 
lief  in  signs  and  prophecies  to  adopt  Aeneas  as  their  fated  leader.     Juturna 

is  supposed  by  several  commentators  to  use  the  words  ironically. 233. 

Alterni ;  two  hy  two;  hini;  there  is  hardly  one  for  every  two  of  us.— — 
234.  Ille,  &c.  Turnus  will  be  exalted  in  fame  to  the  gods,  to  the  defence 
of  whose  altars  he  now  devotes  himself.  For  he  defends  them  against 
Acneas,  who  is  intending  to  dverthrow  the  altars  of  the  native  gods,  and 

establish  his  own  gods  in  Latium.     See  above,  192. 242,  243.  Foedns — 

iafectnm  ;  wish  the  peace  unmade. 245.  Praesentins  ;  viore  effeciive. 

246.  Monstro ;  augurio ;  by  the  supematural  token ;    namely,  the  signum. 

250.  Improbns  ;  ravenous. 256.  FluYio ;  for  the  dative,  see  on  i.  6. 

258.  Expcdinnt  manns ;  prepare  their  hands.     Proprie  quidem  arma 

expediuntw,  sed  quia  hoc  per  manus  Jit,  ipsae  manus  hic  expediri  dicu7itur. 

Heyne. 268.  Simnl  Iioc,  etc. ;  at  once  this  (occurred)  and  a  great  (battle) 

shout  (arosc),  &e. 269.    Cnnei;    the  assemhly.     Comp.  v.   664. 274. 

Laternm  jnnctnras;  the  joining  of  the  ends;  the  extremities  of  the  belt 
which  the  clasp  confines  together  {mordet.) 

282-SS2.  Both  parties  rusli  to  arms,  tearing  down  thc  altars,  while  Latinus  flees  to 
the  city.  Aeneas,  while  trying  in  T.ain  to  calm  the  tumult,  is  wounded  by  a  random 
arrow,  and  is  thus  compelled  to  ahstain  for  a  season  from  the  fight,  while  Turnus, 
taking  advantage  of  his  absence,  slays  a  multitude  of  the  Trojans  and  their  allies. 

291.  Advcrsoeqno;  by  spurring  his  horse  against  him;  literally,  with 

his  horse  against  him. 292,  293.  Oppositis,  etc. ;  he  is  thrown  upon  hia 

head  a^id  shoulders  against  the  altar  standing  behind  {a  tergo)  in  his  way, 

{ob.) 296.  Hoc  Iiabet ;  tliis  (wound)  he  has.     Hahet,  or  hoc  hahet,  is  the 

usual  Latin  form  with  combatants  for  "he  has  got  it." Haec  melior. 

Comp.  v.  483. 298.  Corynaens ;  a  Trojan  priest.     See  vi.  228. 299. 

Ebnso ;   perhaps  an  Etruscan  who  has  comc  to  the  war  under  Mezentius. 

The  Etruscans  wore  the  beard  long. 304.  Alsnm  ;  a  Latin. 316.  Faxo. 

Gr.  §  162,  9,  note;  Z.  §  161. 326.  Poscit.     Turnus  summons  his  chariot- 

eer,  Metiscus,  but  in  his  eagerness  seizes  and  handles  {molititr)  the  reina 

himself. — — Snpcrbns  ;    audacious;    assuming  new  spirit. 331.    Hebri. 

See  on  i.  317.     Mars  was  the  god  of  Thrace.     See  iii.  35. 336.  Irae,  in- 

sidiae ;  these  words  Forbiger  takes  in  the  nominative  plural,  rather  than  in 

the  genitive  after  era. 338.    Qnatit ;    for  incitat. Miserabile  ;    for 

miserahiliter. 365.   Edoni  ;  Thracian. 370.  Adverso  cnrru  ;  a  causal 

ablative ;  the  car  ruuning   against   the  wind   makes   his   crest   wave. 

311.  IVon  tnlit ;  did  not  endure.  Phegeus  threw  himself  against  the  horses 
of  Turnus,  and  attempted  to  turn  them  aside  by  seizing  the  rein  ;  but  he  ia 
himself  borne  along  by  the  horses. 

383-499.  lapis  in  tlie  mcan  time  strives  in  vain  to  extract  the  arrow  from  tha 
wound  of  Aeneas.  He  is  relieved  at  last  tlirough  the  interposition  of  Venus,  and, 
after  embracing  Ascanius,  hastens  from  the  c.amp  to  the  field,  followcd  bj-  Antheus, 
Mnestheus,  Achates,  and  many  hcroce.    His  captains  engagp  at  oaco  in  tho  fight,  while 


590  NOTES    ON    TUE    AENEID. 

he  Bccks  Turnus  alono.  But  Juturna,  assunung  tho  appearance  and  offlco  of  tho 
charioteer,  Metlscua,  Bkilfully  keeps  her  brother'8  chariot  beyond  the  reach  of  Aeuea» 

386.  Supporting  his  alternate  steps  with  his  long  spcar.  Wagner,  fol- 
lowcd  bj  Thiel  and  Forbigcr,  makcs  gressus  the  accusative  after  nitentem, 
m  accordancc  witli  such  phrases  as  viam  ire,  vitam  vivere,  &c.    See  Gr.  §  232  ; 

Z.  §  384. 387.  Infracta  ;  broken.    Comp..x.  731,  and  note. 388.  Anx- 

ilio  Tiani ;  t/ie  mcans  of  relief. 389,  390.  Seccnt,  rescindant,  rcmittant ;  the 

suhjunctivc  dcpends  on poscit. 391.  Dabat;  for  dare  volebat. 395.  Ut 

— parcatis  ;  that  he  niight  postponc  thc  death  of  his  parent  just  dijing ;  literal- 
]y,  laid  down.  A  nian  dangerously  sick  was  somctimes,  as  a  last  resort,  laid 
down  by  the  side  of  his  door,  that  passcrs-by  might  have  an  opportunity  of 

suggesting  any  rcnicdy. 398.  Accrba  ;  adverbially.    Comp.  torva,  vi.  467. 

401.  Paeoninm ;  Jahn  regards  thc  o  as  short  by  poetic  liccnse ;  but 

Heync  makes  thrcc  syllables,  Pac-o-nyum.  "  The  Paeonian  custom ;  "  that 
is,  tbe  custom  of  physicians,  tbe  scrvants  of  Apollo,  who  wcre  wont  to  gird 

themselves  when  examining  and  drcssing  wounds. 408.  Stare  ;  here,  to  be 

filled.   SeconvL300. 413.  Pnbcribns;  mature;  neither  too  old  nor  too 

young ;    neither  dry  nor  milky. 414.    Non  incognita  capris ;   the  wild 

goats  of  Crete,  when  wounded  with  poisoned  arrows,  were  said  to  be  healed 
by  eating  the  dictamnum,  which  caused  the  poisoncd  arrow  to  fall  out  of  the 

wound. 417.  IlOf,  etc. ;  wii,h  this  she  stains  the  water  {amiicm)  which 

had  been  poured  (fusum)  into  tlie  shining  vases.     Running  or  river  water 

h.ad  becn  placcd  in  vesscls  ncar  at  hand. Labris  is   the  dative  for  in 

labra. 422.   Qnippc  ;    for  ccrtc. 432.    Ilabilis;  fitted. 433.  Fnsis 

circnm;  iov  circunfusis. 437.  Intcr  pracmla  dncet ;  shall  lead  thectothe 

rewards  (the  glorious  prizcs  of  niy  conflict.)  Inter  implies  licre  both  to  and 
aniidst ;  as  if  Ascanius  were  surrounded  with  the  prizes  of  victory,  aud  pass- 

ing  along  from  one  to  another. 438-440.  Facito  ut  sis,  Ct  cxcitet. 

450.  Sapit;  swiftly  Iq^ds  on. 451.  AbrnptO  siderc ;  ior  abrupta  nube  ;  a 

hohl  metonymy  suggested  by  the  notion  that  storms  are  occasioned  by  the 

influcnce  of  the  stars. 456.  Rhoeteins  ;  Trojan.     Sce  iii.   108. 405. 

Pcde  acquo  ;  with  equal  foot ;  in  fair  cncountcr,  face  to  face,  as  opposcd  to 

avcrsos. Fcrentcs;  for  infcrentcs. 469.  Mcdia  ictcr  lora  ;  while  he  is 

in  the  midst  of  his  task  or  duty  of  managing  thc  roins. — ■ — 481.  Lcgit ;  tra- 

verscs. 489.  Levis  cnrsa;    (juich  or  sudJcn  in  his  onsct. 491.  Se— • 

arma.     Sec  on  x.  412. 495.  Equcs,  eurrnm  ;  thc  horses  and  chariot  of 

Turnus. 

500-613.  "While  Aeneas  and  Turnua  in  dinerent  parts  of  tho  field  aro  sl.nying  all 
those  they  cncounter,  Acneas  conccivca  tlic  idea  of  attacking  Luurcntuni.  Accord- 
ingly  lio  lcavcs  tlie  Etruscans  :ind  Arcadians  to  occiipy  tlio  enomy,  and  forining  a  pha" 
laux  of  his  '■J'roj:ins,  advanccs  to  tlio  ni*sault.  Tlic  T.atins  in  thc  city  are  tcrrificd  and 
diBtractcd,  and  in  tlio  midHt  of  tlicir  panic  are  i-till  morc  agitated  on  lcarning  that  ths 
queen,  Amala,  in  hor  despair  has  hung  horsolf. 

601.   Divcrsas;   in  difftrcnt  j)Iclccs. — —508.   Cratcs  pectoris;  anothcr 


BOOK   TWELFTH  591 

term  for  costas. 515.  Gcnns;  iov  filium. 518.  Lernae  ;  Lernawasthe 

name  of  a  river  and  marsh  in  the  tcrritory  of  Argos,  aud  not  far  from  the 

border  of  Arcadia. 519«  Ars  ;  his  avocation  of  fisherman. 529.  So- 

nantem ;   for  jactantem. 532j  533.   nnnc — rotae.     The  rushing  chariot 

(^rotae^  threw  Murranus  forward  under  the  reins  and  horses,  {juga;)  that  is, 

under  the  horses  while  he  was  held  entangled  in  the  reins. Crebro  pnlsn ; 

join   with  proculcat. Snper ;    ^ipon  him. 534.   Nec  memorain ;    a7id 

(they)  not  mindful.    "  The  swift  hoof  of  the  horses,  and  of  the  horses  indeed 

not  miudful  of  their  master."     Ladewig. 535.  Hyllo  retains  the  final  o 

long. 546.  Mortis  metae  ;  Ms  death-goal ;  the  goal  or  limit  of  life,  which 

is  death,  or  which  death  constitutes.     Forbiger  calls  mortis,  therefore,  "a 

genitive    of    apposition." 548.    Conversae  ;    turned    upon    each    other. 

563,  564.  Nec  deponnnt.     lu  an  ordinary  council  of  war  they  would 

have  laid  aside  their  arms ;  but  here  they  retain  them. 565.  Hac ;  on 

this,  i.  e.  071  orir,  side ;  hac  parte. 566.  Ob  inceptam  snbitnm ;  on  ac- 

count  of  the  suddenness  of  this  measure  some  might  distrust  the  prudence 

of  it. 568.  Yicti  is  in  the  masculine  plural,  referring  to  the  people  in  the 

city,  instead  of  agreeing  with  urbs  itself.    See  Gr.  §  205,  R.  3,  (3) ;  Z.  §  368. 

5T2.  Caput,  snmma ;  Laureutum,  as  the  chief  seat  of  the  Latins,  is  the 

head  of  the  war  andthe  centre  of  strength. 589.  Trepidae  rernm.     See 

on  i.  lYS. 593.  Haec  fortnna  ;  this  (additional)  misfortune  ;  the  suicide 

of  the  queen. 596.  luccssi;  iov  invadi. 600.  Crimen  ;  the  guilty  in- 

stigator;  or,  taliing  caMsam  and  crimen  together,  the  guilty  cause. 603* 

Kodom  leti;  the  deadly  knot ;  lit.,  tlie  knot  of  a  shameful  death. 

614^709.  Turnus  is  alai-med  by  confused  noises  from  tlie  distant  city,  and,  recog- 
nizing  Juturna  in  her  disguise  as  his  charioteer,  he  mourns  the  slaughter  of  his  friends 
unsuccored  b^'  him.  Saces  brings  ncws  of  the  assault  directed  by  Aeneas  against  the 
city,  and  Turnua  hastens  to  challenge  his  enemy  once  moro  to  single  combat.  The 
lieroes  prepare  at  once  for  battle,  whilo  both  armies  cease  fighting,  and  all  eyes  are 
fastened  on  the  two  leaders. 

621.  Diversa;  remote ;  as  iu  iii.  4. 623-625.  Hnic  occnrrit ;  opposes 

kim. 630.  Nnmero ;  i.  e.  caesorum. 639.  Superat ;   remains  or  sur- 

vives ;  as  in  ii.  6-13,  iii.  339. 640.     Comp.  x.  842. 646.  Manes ;  for 

dii  inferi. 648.  JVescia  cnlpac;  uuconscious  of,  not  guilty  of,  the  dis- 

grace  of  saving  life  by  flight  at  the  sacrifice  of  friends  and  country. 

655.  Dejectnrnm;  supply  se. 657.  Mnssat;    silently  questions;  Latinus 

dares  not  yet  openly  to  express  his  doubts. 659.  Tnifidissima;  most 

faithful  to  thee  ;  the  genitive  is  used  by  poetic  license,  perhaps,  as  analo- 

gous  to  the  genitive  after  amantissimus,  or  studiosissitnus. 664.  Deserto ; 

remote  from  the  actual  scene  of  the  conflict.    Comp.  above,  614. 667. 

Uno,  etc.    Corap.  x.  811  sqq. 671.  E  rotis ;  for  e  curru. 672,673. 

Flammis  vertex,  etc. ;  thefiery  column,  {vcrtex,)  eddying  between  the  platforms 
(of  the  tower)  was  uaving  in  fiames  toicards  the  sky.  Flammis  is  an  ablat. 
H)f  manncr.     Thc  tower  in  question  is  one  which  Turnus  himsclf  had  causcd 


592  NOTES   ON    THE   AENEID. 

to  be  constructed  on  wheels  witliin  tbe  walls,  ready  to  be  stationcd  at  any 

point  where  it  miglit  be  necded  for  dcfeuce. (519.  Jlorte  =pcr  moriem. 

"  By  seeking  death  itsclf,  I  am  resolved  to  endure  all  the  bittcr  sufferiug  of 

dcath,  whatever  it  is."    Forbiger. 680.  Farcrc  fnrorem ;  fo  give  vcnt  to 

furrj.     See  Gr.  §  232 ;  Z.  §  384. Antc  ;  first.    reerlliamp  intcrprets  thia 

passage  thus :  Do  not  retain  me,  ray  sister.  You  will  see  me  again,  but 
no  longcr  disgraced.  Suffer  me  first  (before  you  again  see  me)  to  givc  vent 
to  this  fury.     Jahn  and  otliers,  howevcr,  undcrstand  by  ante^  ardequam  mo- 

riar  ;  thus,  I  muat  die,  hut  before  J  die,  &c. CSl.  Arvis;  dat.  for  in  arva. 

686.  Snblapsa  vctnstas ;  the  impcrceptlble  lapse  of  time. Ant ;  fot 

seu. 68T.  Mons ;  a  vast  roclv,  viontis  pars. Iniprobns  ;  vehcmentissime 

concitatus  ;  fiiriousli/  driven. 694.  Vcrins  (es<);  it  is  more  just. TOl. 

AtllOS ;  now  Monte  Santo,  a  high  mountain  in  Mdccdon,  on  the  Strymonian 
gulf. Cornscis.    Comp.  i.  164. 

710-790.  The  heroes  liin-1  their  spears,  ancl  then  attack  with  the  sworcl.  Turnus  in 
his  haste  having  armed  himself  with  the  sword  of  his  charioteer  instead  of  his  own,  is 
iiow  dcceived  by  the  treacherous  wcapon,  which  breaks  at  the  first  blow.  He  is  pur- 
sued  by  Aeneas  round  and  round,  thongh  the  httter  is  retarded  hy  his  wound. 
While  Aeneas  in  vain  struggles  to  release  his  spear  from  thc  root  of  a  tree  into  which 
it  had  struck,  Juturna,  In  the  gi''so  of  Metiscus,  brings  to  Turnus  his  own  sword. 
Then  Venus,  indignant  at  the  interference  of  thc  Nymph,  loosens  thg  spear  of  Aeneas 
from  the  root,  and  the  battle  is  rcnewed. 

715.  Sila  ;  a  great  forcst  in  the  country  of  the  Brutii. Tabarno  ;  now 

Tavurno  or  Rocca  Hainola,  a  mountain  chain  between  Samnium  and  Campa- 

nia. T25.  Exiimiue ;  the  tongue  or  indcx  in  the  middle  of  the  beam  of 

a  balance. T2T.  Qnem,  ctc. ;  (to  ascertain)  ichom  hardship  {lahor,  hard 

fate)  condemns  to  death?  ivith  which  weirjht  (whcthcr  that  whicli  represents 
Acneas  or  that  which  represcnts  Turnus)  death  sinks  down.  The  lattcr 
clause,  more  fully  exprcssed  :  cui  pondus  vergens  lctum  destinct.  The  death 
of  eithcr  is  dccided  by  the  sinl^ing  down  of  his  side  of  the  balance.  Labor 
is  taken  by  some  in  the  sense  oi pugna.    Pondere  is  in  the  ablative  o{  caicse. 

T28.  Impnnc;  supply  se  facturum. 729.  In  cnscm.     Comp.  ix.  749, 

xi.  284. T33.  JVi  snbcat ;  the  apodosis  is  implied  in  the  foregoing  deserit ; 

hetrays  him  ;  leaves  him  to  pcrish,  uulcss,  kc. T69.  Lanrcnti  divo ;  Fau- 

nus  as  a  tutelar  god  of  Laurcntum. TTl.  Pnro  campo ;  in  an  wiohstmct- 

ed  field. TT9.  Fcccrc  profanos  ;  the  Trojaus  have  profancd  the  honors  of 

Faunus  by  cutting  away  thc  trce  and  removing  the  tokcus  sacrcd  to  him. 
T85.  Dea  Dannia ;  Juturna. 

791-886.  Jupiter  forhids  Juno  to  cxerciso  any  farthcr  influenco  in  tho  contest,  hut 
tonsents,  in  answer  to  her  praycr,  that  tho  Trojans  shall  loso  thcir  name,  and  that  the 
Latins  shall  give  theirs  to  the  united  people.  Oue  of  the  furies  is  sent  in  the  form  of 
a  bird  of  ill  omen  to  tcrrify  Turnus  ;  and  Juturna,  giving  up  all  liope,  plungcs  into 
thc  Tiber. 

791.  Indigctcm.     Acncas  was  dcstincd  to  bc  bornc  lo  hcavcn  as  a  dcv^ 
indiges,  or  deificd  hcro,  and  this  Juno  woll  kncw. 801.  Et  coutinues  the 


BOOK   TWELFTH. 


593 


negation ;  translate,  nor. 805.  Deformare  domnm ;  (o  clothe  the  house  in 

squalid  mouming ;  thc  bouse  of  Latiuus  has  been  sorrow-stricken  most  ol 

all  by  the  suicide  of  Amata. 811.  Digna  mdigua;  for  dif/na  atque  indig' 

na;  i.  e.  all  tbings,  wbether  seemly  or  disgraceful. 817.  Snperstitio; 


fear-inspiring  oath. 835,  83G.  Commixti — sntsident ;  thescnscis:  Only 

this  will  I  grant  to  thc  Trojans,  namely,  tbat  tbey  shall  form  one  body  oi 
one  nation  with  the  Latins,  wbile,  in  respect  to  the  name  of  tbat  nation. 
they  shall  yield  to  tbo  Latins,  or  sink  uiider  tbe  Latins  ;  sball  sink  their  own 


594  NOTES   ON   THE    AENEID. 

name  in  tbat  of  the  Latins. 845.  Geminac  dirac ;  Alecto  and  Tisiphon© 

853.  Uarnm  nnam ;  cither  Alecto  or  Tisiphone.     Megaera  is  supposed 

to  abide  in  Tartarus,  as,  indeed,  niay  be  understood  from  verse  846. 

854.   In  omen;   as  an  omen. 858.   Cydon ;    Cretan. 873.  Snpcrat; 

for  superest. 877.  Fallant ;  escape  me ;   the  wiU  of  Jupiter  under  this 

omen  is  clear  to  me. 880.  Posscm ;  /  should  have  heen  ahle  ;  i,  e.  had  I 

not  been  rcndered  imraortal. 

887-952.  The  heroes  taunt  each  other,  and  Turnus  lifts  a  huge  stone  and  hurla  it  at 
Acnoas,  but  comes  Bhort  of  his  mark.  Turnus  is  wounded  by  the  spear  of  Aeneas  and 
Binks  to  the  ground.  The  Rutulians  groan,  and  Turnus  submits  himself  to  the  will  of 
tho  victor,  who  is  about  to  spare  him,  whon  he  observes  on  his  shoulder  the  belt  of  tho 
elain  Pallas,  and,  maddened  at  the  sight,  drives  hls  sword  to  tho  heart  of  the  slayer. 

896.  Circnmspicit ;  he  looks  round  and  sees. 903.  IVcquc  SC  COgnoscit ; 

nor  does  he  know  hhnself;  he  is  conscious  of  not  possessing  his"wonted 

strength  and  agility. Currentcm  ;  when  running  to  seize  the  stone. 

Enntem ;  when  advancing  with  the  stone  against  Acneas. 914.  Sensns ; 

purposes. 921.  Mnrali  tormento  ;  bi/  the  mural  engine  ;  by  the  hallista, 

with  wHich  walls  are  shattered. 923.  Dissnltcint;  here  reverherate. 

942.  Bnllis;    with  the  (golden)  studs.      See  girdle  of  the  warrior  in  the 

foregoing  wood-cut. 944.  Inimicnm  insigne  ;  the  ornament  of  his  adver- 

sary  ;  an  oruament  which  had  boen  worn  by  his  encmy. 

neyne  concludes  his  commentary  on  the  Aeneid  Bubstantially  as  follows  :  Aeneas 
Immediately  after  this  victory,  received  Lavinia  in  marriage,  united  his  Trojans  in  ono 
nation  with  the  subjects  of  Latinus,  under  the  common  namo  of  Latini,  built  the  city 
of  Lavinium,  and  obtained  the  right  of  sncceeding  to  the  kingdom  of  Latinus.  Thna 
he  sccured  a  dwelling-place  in  Italy,  and  introduced  his  gods  into  Latium,  according 
to  the  purpose  indicated  in  thc  beginning  of  the  pocm. 


MISCELLANEOUS   ILLUSTRATIONS. 


595 


Aplustre. 


Carchesium  or  Cantharus. 


Prora. 


CGStUS. 


Wine  vcssels. 


596 


MISCELLANEOUS   ILLUSTRATIONS. 


JCZlfl 


Ancile. 


TympMiam. 


MISCELLANEOTJS   ILLUSTEATIOJTS. 


597 


Cortina  aad  tripod. 


Iris. 


598  MISCELLANEOUS   ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Eostrum. 


Cap  and  apex  of  a  flamen. 


Ce«ta<. 


D.  APFLETON  &   CO:S  PUBLIUATIONS. 

The  Works  of  Horace. 

With  EBglish  Notcs,  for  the  use  of  Schools  and  Colleges.  By  J.  L. 
LLNCOLN,  Professor  of  the  Latin  Language  and  Literature  in 
Brown  Cniversity,     12mo,  575  pages. 

The  text  of  this  edltion  is  mainly  that  of  Orelli,  the  most  important  readings  of 
otber  critics  being  given  In  foot-notes.  The  volume  is  introduced  with  a  biographical 
sketch  of  Horace  and  a  critique  on  his  writings,  ■which  enable  the  student  to  enter  in- 
tclligently  on  his  work.  Peculiar  grammatical  constructions,  as  well  as  geographical 
and  historlcal  allusions,  are  esplained  in  notes,  which  are  just  full  enough  to  aid  the 
pupil,  to  excite  him  to  gam  a  thorough  understanding  of  the  author,  and  awaken  in  Um 
a  taste  for  philological  studies,  wilhout  taking  aU  labor  off  his  hands.  While  the  cliief 
aim  has  been  to  impart  a  clear  idet  of  Latin  Syntax  as  exliibited  in  the  test,  It  has  also 
been  a  cherished  object  to  take  adv  -otage  of  the  means  so  variously  and  richly  fumished 
by  Horace  for  promoting  the  poeti-  al  taste  and  literary  culture  of  the  student 

From  an  artlcle  Ity  Peof.  Bahk,  ofthe  University  of  Reidelberg,  in  the  Heidelberg 
A:i7ials  of  Literdture. 
"There  are  already  several  American  editions  of  Horace,  intended  for  the  use  of 
schools;  of  one  of  these,  which  has  passed  through  many  editions,  and  has  also  been 
widely  circulated  in  England,  mention  has  been  formerly  njade  in  this  joumal ;  bnt 
that  one  we  may  not  put  upon  an  equality  with  the  one  now  before  us,  inasmuch  aa 
this  has  taken  a  different  stand-j  oint,  which  may  servo  as  a  sign  of  progress  in  this 
department  of  study.  The  editor  has,  it  is  true,  also  intended  his  work  for  the  use  of 
Bchools,  and  has  sought  to  adapt  -.t,  in  all  its  parts,  to  snch  a  use ;  but  still,  without 
.osing  sight  of  this  purpose,  he  hai  proceeded  throughout  with  more  independence.  In 
the  preparation  of  the  Notes,  the  editor  has  ftiithfully  observed  the  principles  (laid 
down  in  his  preface);  the  explana  ions  of  the  poefs  words  commend  themselves  by  a 
lompressed  brevity  which  limits  iiself  to  what  is  most  essential,  and  by  a  sharp  pre- 
cision  of  expressiou ;  and  referenccs  to  other  passages  of  ths  poet,  and  also  to  grammars, 
dictionaries,  «fec,  are  not  wanting." 

Sallusfs  Jugurtha  and  Catiline. 

With  Notes  and  a  Yocabulary.  By  NOBLE  BUTLER  and  MINARD 
STURGUS.     12mo,  397  pages. 

The  editors  have  spent  a  vast  amount  of  time  and  labor  in  correctlng  the  text,  by 
a  comparison  of  the  most  improved  German  and  English  editiuns.  It  Is  believed  that 
this  will  be  found  snperior  to  any  edition  hitherto  published  in  this  country.  In  ac- 
cordance  with  their  chronological  order,  the  "Jugurtha"  precedes  the  "Catiline." 
The  Notes  are  coplous  and  tersely  expressed;  they  display  not  only  flne  scholarship, 
but  (what  is  quite  as  necessary  in  such  a  book)  a  practical  knowledgo  of  the  difficulties 
which  the  student  encounters  in  reading  this  author,  and  the  aids  that  ho  requirea. 
The  Vocabulary  was  prepared  by  the  late  Wii.liam  H.  G.  Butxee.  It  will  be  found  an 
«ble  and  faithful  performanco. 
55 


n.   APPLETON  tC-    C0:B  PUBLICATI0N8. 

Select  Orations  of  M.  Tulliiis  Cicero  : 

With  Notes,  for  tlic  use  of  Scliools  and  C(  Jlogcs,  By  E.  A.  JOHNSON', 
Professor  of  Latin  iu  the  Univeisity  of  New  York.  12mo.  459 
pagcs. 

Tnls  edition  of  Cicero's  Select  Orations  posscsses  sonrie  spocial  advantages  for  the 
Bludent  which  are  both  new  and  important.  It  is  the  only  edition  which  contains  the 
Improved  text  that  has  been  prepared  by  a  recent  carefiil  collation  and  correct  de- 
ciphering  of  the  best  manuscripts  of  Cicero's  writings.  It  is  the  work.  of  the  celebrated 
Orelli,  Madvig,  and  Klotz,  and  has  been  done  since  the  appearance  of  Orelli'3  complete 
edition.  The  Notes,  by  Professor  Johnson,  of  the  New  York  University,  have  been 
mostly  selected,  with  great  care,  from  the  best  German  anthors,  as  well  as  the  English 
edition  of  Amold. 

From  TnoMAs  Ciiase,  Tutor  in  Latin  iii  T/arvard  University. 
"  Atj  edition  of  Cicero  lilie  Johnson's  has  long  been  wanted;  and  the  cxcellence  of 
tho  teit,  the  illustrations  of  words,  particlcs,  and  pronouns,  and  the  explanation  of 
various  poiuts  of  construction  and  interpretation,  bear  witness  to  the  Editor's  famili- 
arity  with  some  of  the  most  Important  results  of  modern  scholarship,  and  entitlo  his 
work  to  a  large  share  of  public  favor." 

"It  seems  to  us  an  improvcment  upon  an}'  edition  of  theso  Orations  that  hasbeen 
published  in  this  country,  and  will  be  found  a  valuable  aid  In  thcir  studies  to  the  lovcrs 
o^^classical  literature." — Troy  Baihj  ]V/ti{/. 

Cicero's  de  Officiis : 

With  English  Notes,  mostly  translated  from  Zumpt  and  Bonnell.  By 
THOMAS  A.  THACHER,  of  Yale  College.     12mo,  194  pages. 

In  this  edition,  a  fow  historical  notes  have  been  introducod  in  casas  whcro  tho 
Dictionary  in  common  use  lias  not  been  found  to  contain  thc  dcsired  information;  tho 
design  of  wbich  is  to  aid  the  learner  in  understanding  the  contents  of  the  treatises,  tho 
thoughts  and  reasoning  of  the  author,  to  explain  grammatical  difficulties,  and  inculcata 
a  knowledge  of  gi-ammatical  principles.  The  Editor  has  almed  throughout  to  guide 
rathcr  than  carry  the  learner  through  difflculties ;  requiring  of  him  moro  study,  in 
consequence  of  his  help,  than  hc  would  have  devoted  to  the  book  without  it. 

From  M.  L.  Btoeteb,  Pro/eJisor  oftlie  Latin  Language  and  Literature  in 
Fennsi/lvania  College. 
"I  have  exartined  with  mnch  plcasuro  Prof  Thachcr'8  edition  of  Ciccio  do  Offlciia, 
and  nm  convinced  of  its  exccllcnce.  The  Notes  havo  been  prcpared  with  grcjt  care 
ond  good  judgment.  rractical  knowledgo  of  the  wants  of  tho  student  has  cnabled  the 
Editor  to  furnish  just  the  kind  of  assistanco  rcquired;  grammatical  dithculties  are 
rcraoved,  and  tho  obscurities  of  the  trcatiso  aro  explained,  tho  intercst  of  the  leamcr 
Is  elicited,  and  his  industry  directcd  rather  than  superseded.  Thero  can  be  bnt  ono 
oj>inion  with  regard  to  thc  merits  of  the  work,  and  I  trust  that  rrofossor  Thacher  will 
bo  disposed  lo  continue  his  labors  so  KirefuIIy  commenced,  in  this  dep.artmout  of  classl- 
cal  learninfc" 


00 

p». 


3 


lO 

CD 
€V2 


(D 

cni 

•i 

H        Oi 


"J        O; 
ti-   -P; 


•rH 
':iO 
U 

•H 

?> 

u 
o 

3 


•rl 

(Di 


i 
.1 


-t' 


University  of  Toronto 
Library 


DONOT 

REMOVE 

THE 

CARD 

FROM 

THIS 

POCKET 


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket 
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  limited 


